
--- PAGE 1 ---
INDIA
The Patents Rules, 2003
Updated till 15-03-2024
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
Rule 1. Short title and commencement
Rule 2. Definitions
Rule 3. Prescribed particulars
Rule 4. Appropriate office
Rule 5. Address for service
Rule 6. Leaving and serving documents
Rule 7. Fees
Rule 8. Forms
Rule 9. Filing of documents and copies, etc.
CHAPTER II APPLICATION FOR PATENTS
Rule 10. Period within which proof of the right under section 7(2)
to make the application shall be furnished
Rule 11. Order of recording applications
Rule 12. Statement and undertaking regarding foreign applications
Rule 13. Specifications
Rule 14. Amendments to specifications
Rule 15. Drawings
Rule 16. Models
CHAPTER III INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS UNDER PATENT COOPERATION
TREATY (PCT)
Rule 17. Definitions
Rule 18. Appropriate office in relation to international
applications –
Rule 19. International applications filed with appropriate office as
receiving office.
Rule 19A. Indian International Searching Authority.
Rule 19B. International search report.
Rule 19C. Time limit for establishing international search report.
Rule 19D. Transmittal of the International Search Report and written
opinion.
Rule 19E. Confidential treatment.
Rule 19F. Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority.
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Rule 19G. Period for making a demand.
Rule 19H. Fees payable to Examining Authority.
Rule 19I. Manner of making a demand.
Rule 19J. Processing of demands for International preliminary 
examination.
Rule 19K. International Preliminary Examination Report.
Rule 19L. Period for establishing international preliminary 
examination report and its transmission.
Rule 19M. Transmittal of the International Preliminary Examination
Report.
Rule 19N. Conditions for and extent of refund.
Rule 20. International applications designating or designating and
electing India
Rule 21. Filing of priority document
Rule 22. Effect of non-compliance with certain requirements
Rule 23. The requirements under this Chapter to be supplemental of
the regulations, etc., under the Treaty
CHAPTER IV PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS
Rule 24. Publication of application
Rule 24A. Request for publication
Rule 24B. Examination of application
Rule 24C. Expedited examination of applications
Rule 25. Identification of published applications
Rule 26. Request for withdrawal
Rule 27. Inspection and supply of published documents
Rule 28. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior publication
Rule 28A. Procedure in relation to consideration of report of
examiner under section 14
Rule 29. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior claiming
Rule 29A. Grace period
Rule 30. Amendment of the complete specification in case of
anticipation
Rule 31. Form of reference to another specification
Rule 32. Procedure in case of potential infringement
Rule 33. Form of reference to another patent
Rule 34. Manner in which a claim under section 20(1) shall be made
Rule 35. Manner in which a request may be made under section 20(4)
Rule 36. Manner of application under section 20(5)
Rule 37. Numbering of applications on the grant of patent
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
CHAPTER VI OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS
Rule 55. Opposition to the patent
Rule 55A. Filing of notice of opposition
Rule 56. Constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding
Rule 57. Filing of written statement of opposition and evidence
Rule 58. Filing of reply statement and evidence
Rule 59. Filing of reply evidence by opponent
Rule 60. Further evidence to be left with the leave of the
Controller
Rule 61. Copies of documents to be supplied
Rule 62. Hearing
Rule 63. Determination of costs
Rule 63A. Request made under section 26(1)
Rule 66. Form of making a request under section 28(2)
Rule 67. Form of making a claim under section 28(3)
Rule 68. Form of application to be made under section 28(7)
Rule 69. Procedure for the hearing of claim or an application under 
section 28.
Rule 70. Mention of inventor
Rule 70A. Certificate of inventorship
CHAPTER VII SECRECY DIRECTIONS
Rule 71. Permission for making patent application outside India
under section 39
Rule 72. Communication of result of reconsideration under section
36(2)
CHAPTER VIII GRANT OF PATENTS
Rule 74. Form of patent
Rule 74A. Inspection of documents related to grant of patent
Rule 75. Amendment of patent under section 44
Rule 76. Manner of applying for direction under section 51(1)
Rule 77. Manner of application under section 51(2)
Rule 78. Procedure for the hearing of proceedings under section 51
Rule 79. Request under section 52(2)
Rule 80. Renewal fees under section 53
CHAPTER IX AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION, SPECIFICATION OR ANY DOCUMENT
RELATING THERETO
Rule 81. Amendment of application, specification or any document 
relating thereto
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rule 82. Preparation of amended specifications, etc.
Rule 83. Publication of the amendment allowed
CHAPTER X RESTORATION OF PATENTS
Rule 84. Restoration of patents
Rule 85. Opposition to restoration under section 61
Rule 86. Payment of unpaid renewal fees
CHAPTER XI SURRENDER OF PATENTS
Rule 87. Surrender of Patents
CHAPTER XII REGISTER OF PATENTS
Rule 88. Register of patents under section 67
Rule 90. Registration of title and interest in patents
Rule 91. Presentation of assignment, etc., of patent to Controller
Rule 92. Registration of title or interest in a patent
Rule 93. Entry of renewal fee
Rule 94. Alteration of address
Rule 95. Inspection of register of patents under section 72 and fees 
payable therefor
CHAPTER XIII COMPULSORY LICENCE AND REVOCATION OF PATENT
Rule 96. Application for compulsory licence etc.
Rule 97. When a prima facie case is not made out
Rule 98. Notice of opposition under section 87(2)
Rule 99. Manner of publication of the revocation order
Rule 100. Application under section 88(4)
Rule 101. Procedure to be followed in case of applications under 
section 88(4)
Rule 102. Application for termination of compulsory licence under 
section 94
CHAPTER XIV SCIENTIFIC ADVISERS
Rule 103. Roll of scientific advisers
Rule 103A. Disqualifications for inclusion in the roll of scientific 
advisers
Rule 104. Manner of application for inclusion in the roll of 
scientific advisers
Rule 105. Inclusion of the name of any other person in the roll of 
scientific advisers
Rule 106. Power to relax
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Rule 107. Removal of names from the roll of scientific advisers
CHAPTER XV PATENT AGENTS
Rule 108. Particulars to be contained in the register of patent 
agents
Rule 109. Application for registration of patent agents
Rule 110. Particulars of the qualifying examination for patent
agents
Rule 111. Registration of patent agents
Rule 111A. Issue of duplicate certificate of patent agents
Rule 112. Details to be included in an application for the 
registration of a patent agent
Rule 113. Registration of patent agents under section 126 (2)
Rule 114. Disqualifications for registration as a patent agent
Rule 115. Payment of fees
116. Removal of a name from the register of patent agents
Rule 117. Restoration of name of persons removed from the register 
of patent agents
Rule 118. Alteration of names, etc., in the register of patent 
agents
Rule 119. Refusal to recognise as patent agent
Rule 120. Publication of the names of patent agents, registered 
under the Act
CHAPTER XVI MISCELLANEOUS
Rule 121. Period within which copies of specification etc. are to be 
filed
Rule 121A. Address of Communications
Rule 122. Correction of clerical errors
Rule 123. Manner of advertisement of the proposed correction of any
error
Rule 124. Manner and time of opposition to the making of corrections
Rule 125. Notification of corrections
Rule 126. Form, etc., of affidavits
Rule 127. Exhibits
Rule 128. Directions not otherwise prescribed
Rule 129. Exercise of discretionary power by the Controller
Rule 129A. Adjournment of hearing
Rule 130. Application for review of decisions or setting aside of
orders of the Controller
Rule 131. Form and manner in which statements required under section 
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
146(2) to be furnished
Rule 132. Form of application for the issue of a duplicate patent
Rule 133. Supply of certified copies and certificates under sections 
72 and 147.
Rule 134. Request for information under section 153
Rule 135. Agency
Rule 136. Scale of costs
Rule 137. Powers of Controller generally
Rule 138. Power to extend time specified or condone delay Rule 139.
Hearing before the Controller to be in public in certain cases
THE FIRST SCHEDULE FEE (See Rule 7)
THE SECOND SCHEDULE Forms [Omitted]
THE THIRD SCHEDULE Forms [Omitted]
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE SCALE OF COSTS (See Rule 136(1))
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
Rule 1. Short title and commencement
(1) These rules may be called the Patents Rules, 2003.
(2) They shall come into force on the date on which the Patents 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 comes into force.
Rule 2. Definitions
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "Act" means the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);
(b) "appropriate office" means the appropriate office of the patent 
office as specified in rule 4;
(c) "article" includes any substance or material, and any plant, 
machinery or apparatus, whether affixed to land or not;
(ca)"educational institution" means a university established or 
incorporated by or under Central Act, a Provincial Act, or a State 
Act, and includes any other educational institution as recognised by 
an authority designated by the Central Government or the State 
Government or the Union territories in this regard;
(d) "Form" means a Form specified in the Second Schedule;
(da) "person other than a natural person" shall include a "small 
entity";
(db) "Request for examination" means a request for examination, 
including expedited examination, made under section 11B in respect 
of rule 24B or rule 24C;
(e) "Schedule" means Schedule to these rules;
(f) "section" means a section of the Act;
(fa) "small entity" means,
(i) in case of an enterprise engaged in the manufacture or 
production of goods, an enterprise where the investment in plant and 
machinery does not exceed the limit specified for a medium 
enterprise under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006; and 
(ii)in case of an enterprise engaged in providing 
or rendering 
of 
services, an enterprise where the investment in equipment is not 
more than the limit specified for medium enterprises under clause
(b) of sub-section (I) of Section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Explanation 1: For the purpose of this clause, "enterprise 
industrial undertaking or a business concern or any other 
means an
establishment, by whatever name called, engaged in the manufacture 
or production of goods, in any manner, pertaining to any industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) or engaged in providing or 
rendering of any service or services in such an industry. 
Explanation 2: In calculating the investment in plant and machinery, 
the cost of pollution control, research and development, industrial 
safety devices and such other things as may be specified by 
notification under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006; shall be excluded.
Explanation 3: The reference rates of foreign currency of the 
Reserve Bank of India shall prevail.
(fb) (i) "Startup" means
(a) an entity in India recognised as a startup by the competent 
authority under Startup India initiative.
(b) In case of a foreign entity, an entity fulfilling the criteria 
for turnover and period of incorporation/ registration as per 
Startup India Initiative and submitting declaration to that effect.
Explanation: In calculating the turnover, reference rates of foreign 
currency of Reserve Bank of India shall prevail.
(g) words and expressions used, but not defined in these rules, 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.
Rule 3. Prescribed particulars
Save as otherwise provided in these rules, the particulars contained 
in a Form are hereby prescribed as the particulars, if any, required 
under the relevant provision or provisions of the Act.
Rule 4. Appropriate office
(1) The appropriate office of the patent office shall
(i) for all the proceedings under the Act, be the head office of the 
patent office or the branch office, as the case may be, within whose 
territorial limits
(a) the applicant or first mentioned applicant in case of joint 
applicants for a patent, normally resides or has his domicile or has 
a place of business or the place from where the invention actually 
originated; or
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
(b) the applicant for a patent or party in a proceeding if he has no 
place of business or domicile in India, the address for service in 
India given by such applicant or party is situated; and
(2) The appropriate office once decided in respect of any 
proceedings under the Act shall not ordinarily be changed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), the 
Controller may transfer an application for patent so filed, to head 
office or, as the case may be, branch office of the Patent Office.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), further 
application referred to in section 16 of the Act, shall be filed at 
the appropriate office of the first mentioned application only.
(5) All further applications referred to section 16 of the Act filed 
in an office other than the appropriate office of the first 
mentioned application, before the commencement of the Patents 
(Amendment) Rules, 2013, shall be transferred to the appropriate 
office of the first mentioned application.
Rule 5. Address for service
Every person, concerned in any proceedings to which the Act or these 
rules relate and every patentee, shall furnish to the Controller an 
address for service, including a postal address in India and an e­
mail address, and such address for service shall be treated for all 
purposes connected with such proceedings or patent as the address of 
the person concerned in the proceedings or of the patentee. Unless 
such an address for service is given, the Controller shall be under 
no obligation either to proceed or deal with any proceeding, or 
patent or to send any notice that may be required to be given under 
the Act or these rules and the Controller may take a decision in the 
matter: Provided that a patent agent shall also be required to 
furnish to the Controller a mobile number registered in India.
Rule 6. Leaving and serving documents
(1) Any application, notice or other document authorised or required 
to be filed, left, made or given at the patent office, or to the 
Controller or to any other person under the Act or these rules, may 
be tendered by hand or sent by a letter addressed to the Controller 
at the appropriate office or to that person through post or 
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
registered post or speed post or by electronic transmission duly 
authenticated. If it is sent by post or registered post or speed 
post or by electronic transmission duly authenticated, it shall be 
deemed to have been filed, left, made or given at the time when the 
mail containing the same would have been delivered in the ordinary 
course of post or registered post or speed post, or by electronic 
transmission duly authenticated, as the case may be. In proving such 
sending, it shall be sufficient to show that the mail was properly 
addressed and transmitted.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub-rule (1), a patent 
agent shall file, leave, make or give all documents only by 
electronic transmission duly authenticated: Provided that any 
document, if asked to be submitted in original, shall be submitted 
within a period of fifteen days, failing which such documents shall 
be deemed not to have been filed.
(2) Any written communication addressed to a patentee at his postal 
address or e-mail address, as it appears on the register of patents 
or at his address for service given under rule 5, 
or to any 
applicant or opponent in any proceedings under the Act or these 
rules, at the postal address or e-mail address, appearing on the 
application or notice of opposition, or given for service, shall be 
deemed to be properly addressed.
(3) All notices and all written communications addressed to a 
patentee, or to any applicant or opponent in any proceedings under 
the Act or these rules, and all documents forwarded to the patentee 
or to the said applicant or opponent, shall, except when they are 
sent by special messenger, be sent by registered post or speed post 
or by electronic transmission duly authenticated.
(4) The date of a notice or a written communication addressed to a 
patentee or to any applicant or opponent in any proceedings under 
the Act and these rules shall be the date of dispatch of the said 
notice or written communication, by registered post or speed post or 
fax or electronic transmission duly authenticated, as the case may 
be, unless otherwise specified under the Act or these rules.
(5) In case of delay in receipt of a document or a communication 
sent by the patent office to a party to any proceedings under the 
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Act or these rules, the delay in transmitting or resubmitting a 
document to the patent office or doing any act by the party may be 
condoned by the Controller if a petition for such condonation of 
delay is made by the party to the Controller immediately after the 
receipt of the document or a communication along with a statement 
regarding the circumstances of the fact and evidence in support of 
the statement:
Provided that the delay condoned by the Controller shall not exceed 
the period between the date on which the party was supposed to have 
received the document or communication by ordinary course of mail or 
electronic transmission and the actual date of receipt of the same.
(6) Without prejudice to sub-rule (5) and notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub-rule (2) of rule 138, the Controller may condone 
the delay in transmitting or resubmitting a document to the patent 
office or performing any act by a party, if a petition for such 
condonation of delay is made by the party to the Controller along 
with a statement regarding the circumstances of the fact and 
evidence in support of the statement, to the satisfaction of the 
Controller, that the delay was due to war, revolution, civil 
disorder, strike, natural calamity, a general unavailability of 
electronic communication services or other like reason in the 
locality where the party resides or has place of business, and that 
such situation was of such severity that it disrupted the normal 
communication in that area and that the relevant action was taken as 
soon as reasonably possible not later than one month from the date 
when such situation had ceased to exist: Provided that the delay 
condoned by the Controller shall not exceed the period for which the 
national emergency was in force, or six months from the expiry of 
the prescribed period, whichever is earlier.
(7) Any liability or burden of proof regarding the authenticity of 
any document filed, left, made or given under these rules, including 
electronically transmitted documents, shall lie only with the party 
filing, leaving, making or giving the document.
Rule 7. Fees
(1) The fees payable under section 142 in respect of the grant of 
patents and applications therefor, and in respect of other matters 
for which fees are required to be payable under the Act shall be as 
specified in the First Schedule.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Provided that ten per cent additional fee shall be payable when the 
applications for patent and other documents are filed through 
physical mode, namely, in hard copy format:
Provided further that in the case of a small entity, or startup, or 
educational institution, every document for which a fee has been 
specified shall be accompanied by Form 28.
(2) (a) (a) The fees payable under the Act or these rules may be 
paid at the appropriate office either in cash or through electronic 
means or may be sent by bank draft or banker’s cheque payable to the 
Controller of Patents and drawn on a scheduled bank at the place 
where the appropriate office is situated and if the draft or 
banker’s cheque is sent by post, the fees shall be deemed to have 
been paid on the date on which the draft or banker’s cheque has 
actually reached the Controller.
(b) omitted
(c) Where a 
fee is payable 
in respect of a document, the 
entire fee 
shall accompany the document.
(3) In case an application processed by a natural person, startup, 
small entity or educational institution is fully or partly 
transferred to a person other than a natural person, startup, small 
entity or educational institution, the difference, if any, in the 
scale of fees between the fees charged from the natural person, 
startup, small entity or educational institution and the fees 
chargeable from the person other than a natural person, startup, 
small entity or educational institution, shall be paid by the new 
applicant along with the request for transfer.
Explanation: Where a startup or small entity, having filed an 
application for a patent, ceases to be a startup or small entity due 
to the lapse of the period during which it is recognized by the 
competent authority, or its turnover subsequently crosses the 
financial threshold limit as notified by the competent authority, no 
such difference in the scale of fees shall be payable.]
(3A) shall be omitted;
(3B) shall be omitted;
(4) Fees once paid in respect of any proceeding shall not ordinarily 
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
be refunded irrespective of whether the proceeding has taken place 
or not:
Provided that, if the Controller is satisfied that during the online 
filing process, the fee was paid more than once for the same 
proceeding, the excess fee shall be refunded.
(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (4), upon 
the 
withdrawal of an application in respect of which a request for 
examination has been filed, but before issuance of first statement 
of objection, the fee may be refunded to the extent prescribed in 
the First Schedule on a request made by the applicant in Form 29.
(5) (i) Subject to the approval of the Controller, any person may 
deposit money in advance and request the Controller to realise any 
fee payable by him from the said deposit and in such case the date 
of the receipt of the request to realise the fee or the date on 
which the request to realise the fee is deemed to have been 
received, whichever is earlier, shall be taken as the date of 
payment of the fee:
Provided that the requisite amount of money is available at the 
credit of the person making such request.
(ii) Subject to the approval of the Controller, any person may 
discontinue the deposit of money in advance and in such case the 
balance, if any, shall be refunded.
Rule 8. Forms
(1) The Forms set forth in the Second Schedule with such variations 
as the circumstances of each case may require shall be used for the 
purposes mentioned therein.
(2) Where no Form is so specified for any purpose, the applicant may 
use Form 30 specified in the Second Schedule.
Rule 9. Filing of documents and copies, etc.
(1) All documents and copies 
of the 
documents, except affidavits and 
drawings, filed with patent office, shall
(a)be typewritten or printed in Hindi or English (unless otherwise 
directed or allowed by the Controller) in large and legible 
characters not less than 0.28 centimeter high with deep indelible 
ink with lines widely spaced not less than one and half spaced only 
upon one side of the paper;
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
(b)be on such paper which is flexible, strong, white, smooth, non­
shiny, and durable of size A4 of approximately 29.7 centimeter by 21 
centimeter with a margin of at least 4 centimeter on the top and 
left hand part and 3 centimeter on the bottom and right hand part 
thereof;
(c)be numbered in consecutive Arabic numerals in the center of the 
bottom of the sheet; and 
(d)contain the numbering to every fifth 
line of each page of the 
description and each page of the claims at right half of the left 
margin.
(2) Any signature which is not legible or which is written in a 
script other than English or Hindi shall be accompanied by a 
transcription of the name either in Hindi or English in capital 
letters.
(3) In case, the application for patent discloses sequence listing 
of nucleotides or amino acid sequences, the sequence listing of 
nucleotides or amino acid sequences shall be filed in computer 
readable text format along with the application, and no print form 
of the sequence listing of nucleotides or amino acid sequences is 
required to be given.
(4) Additional copies of all documents shall be filed at the 
appropriate office as may be required by the Controller.
(5) Names and addresses of applicant and other persons shall be 
given in full together with their nationality and such other 
particulars, if any, as are necessary for their identification.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
CHAPTER II APPLICATION FOR PATENTS
Rule 10. Period within which proof of the right under section 7(2) 
to make the application shall be furnished
Where, in an application for a patent made by virtue of an 
assignment of the right to apply for the patent for the invention, 
if the proof of the right to make the application is not furnished 
with the application, the applicant shall within a period of six 
months after the filing of such application furnish such proof.
Explanation: For the purposes of this rule, the six months period in 
case of an application corresponding to an international application 
in which India is designated shall be reckoned from the actual date 
on which the corresponding application is filed in India.
Rule 11. Order of recording applications
The applications filed in a year shall constitute a series 
identified by the year of such filing. In case of an application 
filed corresponding to an international application in which India 
is designated, such application shall constitute a series distinct 
from the rest of the applications identified by the year of filing 
of corresponding applications in India.
Rule 12. Statement and undertaking regarding foreign applications 
(1) The statement and undertaking required to be filed by an 
applicant for a patent under sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be 
made in Form 3.
(1A) The period within 
which the applicant shall file the 
statement 
and undertaking under sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be six 
months from the date of filing the application.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, the period of six months 
in case of an application corresponding to an international 
application in which India is designated shall be reckoned from the 
actual date on which the corresponding application is filed in 
India.
(2) The time within which the applicant for a patent shall keep the 
Controller informed of the details in respect of other applications 
filed in any country in the undertaking to be given by him under 
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be three months 
from the date of issuance of first statement of objections under 
sub-rule (3) of rule 24B or sub-rule (8) of rule 24C.
(3) The Controller may, use accessible and available databases, for 
considering the information relating to applications filed in a 
country outside India.
(4) The Controller may, under sub-section (2) of section 8, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, direct the applicant to furnish a 
fresh statement and undertaking in Form 3 within two months from the 
date of such communication by the Controller.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the 
Controller may condone the delay or extend the time for filing Form 
3 for a period up to three months upon a request made in Form 4.
Rule 13. Specifications
(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall be 
made in Form 2.
(2) A specification in respect of a divisional application under 
section 16 shall contain specific reference to the number of the 
original application from which the divisional application is made.
(2A) A patent applicant may, if he so desires, file one or more 
further applications under section 16, including in respect of an 
invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification or 
a further application filed under section 16.
(3) A 
specification in respect of a patent of addition under section 
54 shall contain a specific reference to the number of the main 
patent, or the application for the main patent, as the case may be, 
and a definite statement that the invention comprises an improvement 
in, or a modification of, the invention claimed in the specification 
of the main patent granted or applied for.
(4) Where the invention requires explanation through drawings, such 
drawings shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of rule 
15 and shall be supplied with, and referred to in detail, in the 
specification, including the claims where the features illustrated 
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
in the drawings shall be followed by their respective reference 
signs in parentheses:
Provided that in case of a complete specification, if the applicant 
desires to adopt the drawings filed with the provisional 
specification as the drawings or part of the drawings for the 
complete specification, it shall be sufficient to refer to them in 
the complete specification as those left or filed with the 
provisional specification.
(5) Irrelevant or other matter, not necessary, in the opinion of the 
Controller, for elucidation of the invention, shall be excluded from 
the title, description, claims and drawings.
(6) Except in the case of an application (other than a convention 
application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty designating India) which is accompanied by a complete 
specification, a declaration as to the inventorship of the invention 
shall be filed in Form 5 with the complete specification or at any 
time before the expiration of one month from the date of filing of 
the complete specification, as the Controller may allow on an 
application made in Form 4.
Explanation: For the purposes of this rule, the date of filing of 
the complete specification with respect to an application 
corresponding to an international application in which India is 
designated shall be reckoned from the actual date on which the 
corresponding application is filed in India.
(7) (a) The abstract as specified under clause (d) of sub-section
(4) of section 10, accompanying the specification shall commence 
with the title of the invention. The title of the invention shall 
disclose the specific features of the invention normally in not more 
than fifteen words.
(b) The abstract shall contain a concise summary of the matter 
contained in the specification and the summary shall indicate 
clearly the technical field to which the invention belongs, 
technical advancement of the invention as compared to the existing 
knowledge and principal use of the invention excluding any 
speculative use and where necessary, the abstract shall contain the 
chemical formula, which characterises the invention.
(c) The abstract may not contain more than one hundred and fifty 
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
words.
(d) If the specification contains any drawing, the applicant shall 
indicate on the abstract the figure, or exceptionally, the figures 
of the drawings which may accompany the abstract when published. 
Each main feature mentioned in the abstract and illustrated by a 
drawing shall be followed by the reference sign used in that 
drawing.
(e) The abstract shall be so drafted that it constitutes an 
efficient instrument for the purposes of searching in the particular 
technical field, in particular by making it possible to assess 
whether there is a need to consult the specification itself.
(8) The period within which reference to 
the deposit shall be made 
in the specification under sub-clause (A) of clause (ii) of sub­
section (4) of section 10 shall be three months from the date of 
filing of the application: Provided that in case of a request for 
publication under rule 24A, such reference shall be made on or 
before the date of filing of such request.
Rule 14. Amendments to specifications
(1) When amendments are made to a provisional or complete 
specification or any drawing accompanying it, the pages 
incorporating such amendments shall be retyped and submitted to form 
a continuous document.
(2) A marked copy clearly identifying the amendments carried out and 
a statement clearly indicating the portion (page number and line 
number) of the specification or drawing being amended along with the 
reason shall also be filed.
(3) Amendments shall not be made by slips pasted on, or as footnotes 
or by writing in the margin of any of the said documents.
(4) When a retyped page or pages incorporating amendments are 
submitted, the corresponding earlier page shall be deemed to have 
been superseded and cancelled by the applicant.
Rule 15. Drawings
(1) Drawings, when furnished under section 10 by the applicants 
otherwise than on requisition made by the Controller, shall 
accompany the specifications to which they relate.
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
(2) No drawings or sketch, which would require a special 
illustration of the specification, shall appear in the specification 
itself.
(3) At least 
one copy of the drawing shall be prepared neatly and 
clearly on a durable paper sheet.
(4) Drawings 
shall be on standard A4 size sheets with a clear margin 
of at least 4 cm on the top and left hand and 3 cm at the bottom and 
right hand of every sheet.
(5) Drawings 
shall be on a scale sufficiently large to show the 
inventions clearly and dimensions shall not be marked on the 
drawings.
(6) Drawings shall be sequentially or systematically numbered and 
shall bear
(i) in the left hand top corner, the name of the applicant;
(ii) in the right hand top corner, the number of the sheets of 
drawings, and the consecutive number of each sheet; and
(iii) in the right hand bottom corner, the signature of the 
applicant or his agent.
(7) No descriptive matter shall appear on the drawings except in the 
flow diagrams.
Rule 16. Models
(1) Models or samples shall be furnished under section 10 only when 
required by the Controller.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
CHAPTER III INTERNATIONAL APPLICATIONS UNDER PATENT COOPERATION 
TREATY (PCT)
Rule 17. Definitions
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "Article" means an Article of the Treaty;
(aa) "Examining Authority" means the Indian International 
Preliminary Examining Authority referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 
19F;
(ab) "International Bureau" means the International Bureau of World 
Intellectual Property Organisation;
(ac) "Searching Authority" means the Indian International Searching 
Authority referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 19A;
(b) "Treaty" or "PCT" means the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
(c) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the PCT shall have the same meaning as assigned to them 
in that Treaty.
Rule 18. Appropriate office in relation to international 
applications
(1) The receiving office, the designated office and the elected 
office, as the case may be, for the purposes of international 
applications shall be the appropriate office referred to in rule 4.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the Patent 
Office, Delhi branch shall be the appropriate office for dealing 
with the International Bureau and any other International Searching 
Authority and International Preliminary Examining Authority.
(3) An international application 
shall be 
filed at and processed by 
the appropriate office, referred to in sub-rule (1), in accordance 
with the provisions of this Chapter, the Treaty and the regulations 
under the Treaty.
(4) The appropriate office referred to in sub-rule (1),shall, on 
receipt of an international application,
(a) keep one copy of the application to be called the "home copy" in 
its office;
(b) transmit one copy to be called the "record copy" to the 
International Bureau; and
(c) transmit one copy to be called "search copy”“ to the competent 
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
International Searching Authority referred to in Article 16 of the 
Treaty, And simultaneously furnish complete details of such 
application to the Patent Office, Delhi branch.
Rule 19. International applications filed with appropriate office as 
receiving office
(1) An international application shall be filed with the appropriate 
office in triplicate either in English or Hindi language.
(2) The fees payable in respect of an international application 
shall, in addition to the fees specified in the regulations under 
the Treaty, be the fees as specified in the First Schedule and the 
Fifth Schedule.
(3) Where an international application has not been filed in 
triplicate, the appropriate office shall, upon payment of fees 
specified in the First Schedule, prepare the required additional 
copies.
(4) On receipt of a request from the applicant and on payment of the 
fees specified in the First Schedule, the appropriate office shall 
prepare a certified copy of the priority document and promptly 
transmit the same to the International Bureau and intimate the 
applicant and the Patent Office, Delhi branch.
Rule 19A. Indian International Searching Authority
(1) The Patent Office, Delhi branch shall perform the functions of 
the Indian International Searching Authority under the treaty in 
accordance with an agreement between the Indian Patent Office and 
the International Bureau.
(2) The fees payable to the Searching Authority shall, in addition 
to the fees specified in the regulations made under the Treaty, be 
the fees as specified in the Fifth Schedule.
(3) The Searching Authority referred to in sub-rule (1), shall 
establish international search report in respect of international 
applications, or, as the case may be, declare in accordance with 
sub-rule (3) of rule 19B, in cases where India has been indicated as 
a competent International Searching Authority.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Rule 19B. International search report
(1) The Searching Authority shall, on receipt of the search copy, 
notify the International Bureau and the applicant about the receipt 
of search copy with identification mark “ISA/IN” along with the 
international application number and its serial number and the date 
of receipt of the search copy.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of 
sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Searching Authority shall, upon 
receipt of the search copy, refer the international application, in 
the order in which the search copy was received, to an examiner or 
any other officer appointed under subsection (2) of Section 73 of 
the Act for preparing an international search report, in accordance 
with the provisions contained in the Treaty and the regulations 
under the Treaty, ordinarily within a period of one month but not 
exceeding two months from the date of such reference.
(3) The Searching Authority, if it considers that
(a) the international application relates to a subject matter which 
the Searching Authority is not required to search and accordingly 
decides not to search; or
(b) the description, claims or drawings fail to comply with the 
requirements prescribed under the regulation under the Treaty to 
such an extent that a meaningful search could not be carried out, 
the Authority shall so declare and notify the applicant and the 
International Bureau that no international search report shall be 
established.
(4) In a case where any situation referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b) of sub-rule (3) is found to exist in connection with 
certain claims only, the Searching Authority shall indicate this 
fact in the International Search Report in respect of such claims, 
and for other claims, it shall establish the International Search 
Report.
(5) The Searching Authority, if it considers that the international 
application does not comply with the requirement of unity of 
invention, in accordance with the provisions contained in 13 of the 
regulations under the Treaty, shall send a notice specifying the 
reasons for which the international application is not considered as 
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
complying with the requirement of unity of invention and inviting 
the applicant
(a) to pay the additional fees specified in the Fifth Schedule, 
indicating the amount of fees to be paid, within a period of one 
month from the date of such invitation; and
(b) to pay, where applicable, the protest fee specified in the Fifth 
Schedule, indicating the amount of fee to be paid, within a period 
of one month from the date of such invitation.
(6) The Searching Authority shall establish the International Search 
Report on those parts of the international application which relate 
to the first invention mentioned in the claims ("main invention") 
and subject to payment of additional fee within the period specified 
in sub-rule (5), on those parts of the international application 
which relate to inventions in respect of which such additional fees 
were paid.
(7) Any applicant may pay the additional fees under the protest, 
that is, accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the 
international application complies with the requirement of unity of 
invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is 
excessive.
(8) The examination of the protest referred to in sub-rule (7) shall 
be carried out by a Review Committee constituted by the Controller.
(9) The Review Committee constituted under sub-rule (8) shall 
examine the extent to which the protest is justified and shall 
accordingly order for the total or partial reimbursement of the 
additional fee to the applicant.
(10) Where the applicant has not paid the fees for the protest in 
accordance with clause (b) of sub-rule (5),the protest shall be 
considered not to have been made and the Searching Authority shall 
so declare.
(11) The protest fee shall be refunded to the applicant where the 
Review Committee referred to in sub-rule (8) finds that the protest 
was entirely justified.
(12) Where the international application contains the disclosure of 
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
one or more nucleotide or amino acid sequences and the sequences are 
not furnished in computer-readable text format, the Searching 
Authority shall send a notice to the applicant to submit the 
sequence listing in computer readable text format and pay the late 
furnishing fee specified in the Fifth Schedule, within a period of 
one month from the date of such notice and if the applicant fails to 
comply with the notice, the Searching Authority shall search the 
international application to the extent that a meaningful search can 
be carried out without the sequence listing.
Rule 19C. Time limit for establishing international search report 
The Searching Authority shall establish the International Search 
Report and written opinion or, as the case may be, the declaration 
referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 19B within a period of three 
months from the date of receipt of the search copy by the Searching 
Authority, or within a period of nine months from the date of 
priority, whichever expires later.
Rule 19D. Transmittal of the International Search Report and written 
opinion
The Searching Authority shall transmit one copy of the International 
Search Report or of the declaration referred to in Article 17(2)(a) 
of the Treaty, and one copy of the written opinion established under 
43bis.1 of the regulations under the Treaty, to the International 
Bureau and one copy to the applicant, on the same day.
Rule 19E. Confidential treatment
All matters pertaining to international applications shall be kept 
confidential in accordance with the treaty and the regulations under 
the Treaty.
Rule 19F. Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority
(1) The Patent Office, Delhi branch shall perform the functions of 
the International Preliminary Examining Authority under the Treaty 
in accordance with an agreement between the Indian Patent Office and 
the International Bureau.
(2) The Examining Authority referred to in sub-rule (1), shall 
establish
(a) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect of 
all international applications electing India as an International 
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Preliminary Examining Authority;
(b) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect of 
the demands filed by the nationals or residents of other countries 
in accordance with an agreement between Indian Patent Office and the 
International Bureau, upon being notified by the International 
Bureau;
(c) the International Preliminary Examination in respect of demands 
made by the nationals or residents of other countries not party to 
the Treaty or not bound by Chapter II of the Treaty, if the Assembly 
has so approved.
Rule 19G. Period for making a demand.
(1) The demand for international preliminary examination shall be 
made within the period specified in the Treaty or regulations under 
the Treaty.
(2) In case the demand is made after the expiry of the period 
specified in sub-rule (1), it shall be considered to have not been 
made and no International Preliminary Examination Report shall be 
prepared.
Rule 19H. Fees payable to Examining Authority.
The fees payable to the Examining Authority shall, in addition to 
the fees specified in the regulations under the Treaty, be the fees 
specified in the Fifth Schedule.
Rule 19I. Manner of making a demand.
A demand shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained 
in these rules, the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty.
Rule 19J. Processing of demands for international preliminary 
examination.
(1) The Examining Authority, on receipt of the demand for 
international preliminary examination, if the Examining Authority is 
competent to conduct an international preliminary examination, shall 
assign the identification mark “IPEA/IN” and shall notify the 
Applicant and the International Bureau.
(2) In case where the Examining Authority is not competent to 
conduct the international preliminary examination of the 
international application, it shall transmit the demand promptly to 
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
the International Bureau.
Rule 19K. International Preliminary Examination Report.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of 
sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Examining Authority shall refer the 
international application, in accordance with the provisions 
contained in the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty, in the 
order in which the demand was received in the Examining Authority to 
an examiner or any other officer appointed under sub-section (2) of 
section 73 of the Act for preparing an International Preliminary 
Examination Report ordinarily within a period of three months but 
not exceeding four months from the date of such reference.
(2) Claims relating to inventions in respect of which no 
International Search Report has been established shall not be the 
subject of international preliminary examination.
(3) The Examining Authority, if considers that
(a) the international application relates to a subject matter on 
which the Examining Authority is not required to carry out an 
international preliminary examination, and decides not to carry out 
such an examination; or
(b) that the description, the claims, or the drawings, are so 
unclear, or the claims are so inadequately supported by the 
description, that no meaningful opinion can be formed on the 
questions of novelty, inventive step (non-obviousness), or 
industrial applicability, the Examining Authority shall not go into 
these questions and shall inform the applicant of this opinion and 
the reasons therefor.
(4) In a case where any situation referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b) of sub-rule (3) is found to exist in connection with 
certain claims only, the Examining Authority shall indicate this 
fact in the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect 
of such claims, and for other claims, it shall establish the 
International Preliminary Examination Report.
(5) Where the Examining Authority finds that the international 
application does not comply with the requirement of unity of 
invention, in accordance with the provisions contained in 13 of the 
regulations under the Treaty and chooses to invite the applicant, at 
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
his option, to restrict the claims or to pay additional fees. it 
shall issue a notice to the applicant:
(a) specifying at least one possibility of restriction which. in the 
opinion of the Examining Authority. would be in compliance with the 
applicable requirement;
(b) specifying the reasons for which the international application 
is not considered as complying with the requirement of unity of 
invention;
(c) inviting the applicant to comply with the invitation within one 
month from the date of such notice;
(d) indicating the amount of the required additional fees to be paid 
in case the applicant so chooses; and
(e) inviting the applicant to pay the protest fee within one month 
from the date of such notice, and indicate the amount to be paid, as 
specified in the Fifth Schedule.
(6) Any applicant may pay the additional fees under the protest, 
that is, accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the 
international application complies with the requirement of unity of 
invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is 
excessive.
(7) The examination of the protest referred to in sub-rule {5) shall 
be carried out by a Review Committee constituted by the Controller.
(8) The Review Committee constituted under sub-rule (7) shall 
examine the extent to which the protest is justified and shall 
accordingly order for the total or partial reimbursement to the 
applicant of the additional fee.
(9) The protest fee shall be refunded to the applicant where the 
Review Committee referred to in sub-rule (6) finds that the protest 
was entirely justified.
Rule 19L. Period for establishing international preliminary 
examination report and its transmission.
The period for establishing the International Preliminary
Examination Report shall be:
(i)twenty eight months from the priority date; or
(ii) six months from the period specified under 69.1 of the 
regulations under the Treaty for the start of the international 
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
preliminary examination; 
or
(iii) six months from the date of receipt by the Examining Authority 
of the translation furnished under 55.2 of the regulations under the 
Treaty, 
whichever expires last.
Rule 19M. Transmittal of the International Preliminary Examination 
Report.
The Examining Authority shall transmit one copy of the International 
Preliminary Examination Report and its annexures, if any, to the 
International Bureau, and one copy to the applicant, on the same 
day.
Rule 19N. Conditions for and extent of refund.
The fee paid by the applicant may be refunded, waived or reduced to 
the extent and in accordance with the conditions specified in the 
Treaty or the regulations under the Treaty and the agreement entered 
between the Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau.
Rule 20. International applications designating or designating and 
electing India
(1) An application corresponding to an international application 
filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty may be made in Form 1 under 
sub-section (1A) of section 7.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, "an application 
corresponding to an international application means an international 
application as filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty which includes 
any amendments made by the applicant under Article 19 and 
communicated to Designated Office under Article 20 or any amendment 
made under sub-clause (b) of clause (2) of Article 34 of the Treaty: 
Provided that the applicant, while filing such application 
corresponding to an international application designating India, may 
delete a claim, in accordance with the provisions contained in rule 
14.
(2) The Patent Office shall not commence processing of an 
application filed corresponding to international application 
designating India before the expiration of the time limit prescribed 
under sub-rule (4)(i).
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
(3) An applicant in respect of an international application 
designating India shall, before the time limit prescribed in sub­
rule (4)(i),
(a) pay the prescribed national fee and other fees to the patent 
office in the manner prescribed under these rules and under the 
regulations made under the Treaty;
(b) and where the international application was either not filed or 
has not been published in English, file with the patent office, a 
translation of the application in English, duly verified by the 
applicant or the person duly authorised by him that the contents 
thereof are correct and complete.
(4) (i) The time limit referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be thirty 
one months from the priority date as referred to in Article 2(xi); 
(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i), the Patent 
Office may, on the express request filed in Form 18 along with the 
fee specified in First Schedule, process or examine the application 
at any time before thirty one months.
(5) The translation of the international application referred to in 
sub-rule (3) shall include a translation in English of,
(i) the description;
(ii) the claims as filed;
(iii) any text matter of the drawings;
(iv) the abstract; and
(v) in case the applicant has not elected India and if the claims 
have been amended under Article 19, then the amended claims together 
with any statement filed under the said Article;
(vi) in case the applicant has elected India and any amendments to 
the description, the claims and text matter of the drawings that are 
annexed to the international preliminary examination report.
(6) If the applicant fails to file a translation of the amended 
claims and annexures referred to in sub-rule (5), even after 
invitation from the appropriate office to do so, within a time limit 
as may be fixed by that office having regard to the time left for 
meeting the requirements, the amended claims and annexures shall be 
disregarded in the course of further processing the application by 
the appropriate office.
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
(7) The applicant in respect of an international application 
designating India shall when complying with sub-rule (3), preferably 
use Forms set out in the Second Schedule before the appropriate 
office as designated office.
Rule 21. Filing of priority document
(1) Filing of priority document –
Where the applicant in respect of an international application 
designating India has not complied with the requirements of 
paragraphs (a), (b) or (b-bis) of rule 17.1 of the regulations under 
the Patent Cooperation Treaty, and subject to paragraph (d) of the 
said rule 17.1 of regulations under the Treaty, the applicant shall 
file the priority document referred to in that rule before the 
expiration of the time limit referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 20 
in the Patent Office.
(2) Where sub-paragraph (i) or sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (e) 
of rule 51bis.1 of the regulations under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty is applicable, an English translation thereof duly verified 
by the applicant or the person duly authorised by him shall be filed 
within the time limit specified in sub-rule (4) of rule 20.
(3) Where the applicant does not comply with the requirements of 
sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2), the Patent Office shall invite the 
applicant to file the priority document or the translation thereof, 
as the case may be, within three months from the date of such 
invitation, and if the applicant fails to do so, 
the claim of the 
applicant for the priority shall be disregarded for the purposes of 
the Act.
Rule 22. Effect of non-compliance with certain requirements
An international application designating India shall be deemed to be 
withdrawn if the applicant does not comply with the requirements of 
rule 20.
Rule 23. The requirements under this Chapter to be supplemental of 
the regulations, etc., under the Treaty
(1)The provisions of this Chapter shall be supplemental to the PCT 
and the regulation and the administrative instructions made 
thereunder.
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
(2) In case of a conflict between any provisions of the rules 
contained in this Chapter and provisions of the Treaty and the 
regulations and the administrative instructions made thereunder, the 
provisions of the Treaty and the regulations and administrative 
instructions made thereunder shall apply in relation to 
international applications.
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
CHAPTER IV PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS
Rule 24. Publication of application
The period for which an application for patent shall not ordinarily 
be open to public under sub-section (1) to section 11A shall be 
eighteen months from the date of filing of application or the date 
of priority of the application, whichever is earlier Provided that 
the period within which the Controller shall publish the application 
in the journal shall ordinarily be one month from the date of expiry 
of said period, or one month from the date of request for 
publication under rule 24A.
Rule 24A. Request for publication
A request for publication under sub-section (2) of section 11A shall 
be made in Form 9.
Rule 24B. Examination of application
(1)(i) A request for examination under section 11B shall be made in 
Form 18 within thirty-one months from the date of priority of the 
application or from the date of filing of the application, whichever 
is earlier;
(ii) The period within which the request for examination under sub­
section (3) of section 11B to be made shall be thirty-one months 
from the date of priority if applicable, or thirty-one months from 
the date of filing of the application;
(iii) The request for examination under sub-section (4) of section 
11B shall be made within thirty-one months from the date of priority 
or from the date of filing of the application, or within six months 
from the date of revocation of the secrecy direction, whichever is 
later;
(iv) The request for examination of application as filed according 
to the 'explanation' under sub-section (3) of section 16 shall be 
made within thirty-one months from the date of filing of the 
application or from the date of priority of the first mentioned 
application or within six months from the date of filing of the 
further application, whichever is later;
(v) The period for making request for examination under section 11B 
of the applications filed before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall 
be the period specified under section 11B before the commencement of 
the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 or the period specified under 
these rules, whichever expires later;
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
(vi) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-rule, in respect 
of an application filed before commencement of the Patents 
(Amendment) Rules, 2024, the period for making request for 
examination under sub-section (1) of section 11B shall be the period 
specified under this sub-rule before the commencement of the Patents 
(Amendment) Rules, 2024.
(2)(i) Where 
the request 
for 
examination has been filed under 
sub
rule (1) and application has been published under section 11A, the 
Controller shall refer to the application, specification and other 
documents related thereto to the examiner and such reference shall 
be made in the order in which the request is filed:
Provided that in the case of a further application filed under 
section 16, the order of reference of such further application shall 
be the same as that of the first mentioned application:
Provided further that in case the first mentioned application has 
already been referred for examination, the further application shall 
have to be accompanied by a request for examination, and such 
further application shall be published within one month and be 
referred to the examiner within one month from the date of such 
publication.
(ii) The period within which the examiner shall make the report 
under sub-section (2) of section 12, shall ordinarily be one month 
but not exceeding three months from the date of reference of the 
application to him by the Controller;
(iii) the period within which the Controller shall dispose of the 
report of the examiner shall ordinarily be one month from the date 
of the receipt of such report by the Controller.
(3) A first statement of objections, along with any documents as may 
be required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or 
his authorised agent within one month from the date of disposal of 
the report of examiner by the Controller: Provided that where the 
request for examination was filed by a person interested, only an 
intimation of such examination may be sent to such person 
interested.
(4) Reply to the first statement of objections and subsequent reply, 
if any, shall be processed in the order in which such a reply is 
received.
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
(5) The time for putting an application in order for grant under 
section 21 shall be six months from the date on which the first 
statement of objections is issued to the applicant to comply with 
the requirements.
(6) The time for putting an application in order for grant under 
section 21 as prescribed under sub-rule (5) may be further extended 
for a period of three months on a request in Form 4 for extension of 
time along with prescribed fee, made to the Controller before expiry 
of the period specified herein.
Rule 24C. Expedited examination of applications
(1)An applicant may file a request for expedited examination in Form 
18A along with the fee as specified in the first schedule only by 
electronic transmission duly authenticated within the period 
prescribed in rule 24B on any of the following grounds, namely:
(a) that India has been indicated as the competent International 
Searching Authority or elected as an International Preliminary 
Examining Authority in the corresponding international application; 
or
(b) that the applicant is a startup; or
(c) that the applicant is a small entity; or
(d) that if the applicant is a natural person or in the case of 
joint applicants, all the applicants are natural persons, then the 
applicant or at least one of the applicants is a female; or
(e) that the applicant is a department of the Government; or
(f) that the applicant is an institution established by a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by the 
Government; or
(g) that the applicant is a Government company as defined in clause 
(45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or
(h) that the applicant is an institution wholly or substantially 
financed by the Government; or
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, the term 'substantially 
financed' shall have the same meaning as in the explanation to sub­
section (1) of section 14 of the Comptroller and Auditor General's 
(Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of 
Service Act, 1971 
No.56 of 1971); 
(i) that 
the application pertains 
to a sector which 
is notified by 
the Central Government on the basis of a request from the head of a 
department of the Central Government. Provided that public comments 
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
are invited before any such notification; or
(j) that the 
applicant is eligible under an arrangement for 
processing a patent application pursuant to an agreement between 
Indian Patent Office and a foreign Patent Office.
Explanation: The patentability of patent applications filed under 
clause (j) above will be in accordance with the relevant provisions 
of the Act.
(2) A request for 
examination filed 
under rule 24B may be converted 
to a request for expedited examination under sub-rule (1) of rule 
24C by paying the relevant fees and submitting requisite documents 
as required under sub-rule (1).
(3) Except where the application has already been published under 
sub-section (2) of section 11A or a request for publication under 
rule 24A has already been filed, a request for expedited examination 
shall be accompanied by a request for publication under rule 24A.
(4) Where the request for expedited examination does not comply with 
the requirements of this rule, such a request shall be processed in 
accordance with the provisions contained in rule 24B, with an 
intimation to the applicant, and shall be deemed to have been filed 
on the date on which the request for expedited examination was 
filed.
(5)The Controller shall refer the request for expedited examination 
along with the application and specification and other documents to 
the examiner, in respect of the applications where the request for 
expedited examination has been received, in order to file such 
requests.
Provided that a request for expedited examination under this rule 
filed by a startup or small entity shall not be questioned merely on 
the ground that the startup or small entity, having filed an 
application for a patent, ceases to be a startup or small entity due 
to the lapse of the period during which it is recognised by the 
competent authority, or its turnover subsequently crosses the 
financial threshold limit as notified by the competent authority.
(6) The period within which the examiner shall make the report under 
sub-section (2) of section 12, shall ordinarily be one month but not 
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
exceeding two months from the date of reference of the application 
to him by the Controller.
(7) The period within which the Controller shall dispose of the 
report of the examiner shall be one month from the date of receipt 
of such report by the Controller.
(8) A first statement of objections along with any document, if 
required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or his 
authorised agent within fifteen days from the date of disposal of 
the report of examiner by the Controller.
(9) Reply to the first statement of objections and subsequent reply, 
if any, in respect of an application where the request for expedited 
examination was filed, shall be processed in the order in which such 
reply for such application is received.
(10) The time for putting an application in order for grant under 
section 21 shall be six months from the date on which the first 
statement of objections is issued to the applicant.
(11) The time for putting an application in order for grant under 
section 21, as prescribed in sub-rule (10) may be further extended 
for a period of three months on a request for extension made in Form 
4 along with the prescribed fee, made to the Controller before the 
expiry of the period specified herein.
(12) The Controller shall dispose of the application within a period 
of three months from the date of receipt of the last reply to the 
first statement of objections or within a period of three months 
from the last date to put the application in order for grant under 
section 21 of the Act, whichever is earlier.
Provided that this time limit shall not be applicable in case of 
pre-grant opposition.
(13) Notwithstanding anything containing this rule, the Controller 
may limit the number of requests for expedited examination to be 
received during the year by way of a notice to be published in the 
official journal.
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
Rule 25. Identification of published applications
Publication of application under sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 
11A shall be identified by the letter “A” along with the number of 
application.
Rule 26. Request for withdrawal
A request for withdrawing the application under sub-section (4) of 
section 11B shall be made in Form 29.
Rule 27. Inspection and supply of published documents
After the date of publication of the application under section 11A, 
the application together with the complete specification and 
provisional specification, if any, the drawing, if any, the abstract 
and any other document filed in respect of the application may be 
inspected at the appropriate office by making a written request to 
the Controller on payment of the fee on that behalf and copies 
thereof may be obtained on payment of fees specified in the First 
Schedule.
Rule 28. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior publication
(1) If the Controller is satisfied after investigation under section 
13 that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete 
specification has been published in any specification or other 
document referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2) of the said section, the Controller shall communicate the gist 
of specific objections and the basis thereof to the applicant and 
the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to amend his 
specification.
(2) If the applicant contests any of the objections communicated to 
him by the Controller under sub-rule (1), or if he refiles his 
specification along with his observations as to whether or not the 
specification is to be amended, he shall be given an opportunity to 
be heard on the matter if he so requests:
Provided that such a request shall be made on a date earlier than 
ten days of the final date of the period preferred to under sub­
section (1) of section 21:
Provided further that a request for hearing may be allowed to be 
filed within such a shorter period as the Controller may deem fit in 
the circumstances of the case.
37

--- PAGE 38 ---
(3) If the applicant requests for a hearing under sub-rule (2) 
within a period of one month from the date of communication of the 
gist of objections, or, the Controller, considers it desirable to do 
so, whether or not the applicant has refiled his application, he 
shall forthwith fix a date and time for hearing having regard to the 
period remaining for putting the application in order or to the 
other circumstances of the case.
(4) The applicant shall be given ten days’ notice of any such 
hearing or such shorter notice as appears to the Controller to be 
reasonable in the circumstances of the case and the applicant shall, 
as soon as possible, notify the Controller whether he will attend 
the hearing.
(5) After hearing the applicant, or without hearing if the applicant 
has not attended or has notified that he does not desire to be 
heard, the Controller may specify or permit such amendment of the 
specification as he thinks fit to be made and may refuse to grant 
the patent unless the amendment so specified or permitted is made 
within such period as may be fixed.
(6) The hearing may also be held through video-conferencing or 
audio-visual communication devices: Provided that such hearing shall 
be deemed to have taken place at the appropriate office.
Explanation: For the purposes of this rule, the expression 
communication device shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
in clause (ha) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
(7) In all cases of hearing, written submissions and the relevant 
documents, if any, shall be filed within fifteen days from the date 
of hearing.
Rule 28A. Procedure in relation to consideration of report of 
examiner under section 14
In case the applicant contests any of the objections communicated to 
him, the procedure specified under rule 28 may apply.
Rule 29. Procedure in case of anticipation by prior claiming
(1) When it is found that the invention as far as claimed in any 
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
claim of the complete specification, is claimed in any claim of any 
other specification falling within clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 13, the applicant shall be so informed and shall be afforded 
an opportunity to amend his specification.
(2) If the applicant’s specification is otherwise in order for grant 
and an objection under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 
is outstanding, the Controller may postpone the grant of patent and 
allow a period of two months for removing the objection.
Rule 29A. Grace period
An application to avail the period specified under section 31 shall 
be filed in Form 31, along with the fees specified in the First 
Schedule.
Rule 30. Amendment of the complete specification in case of 
anticipation
(1) If the applicant so requests at any time, or if the Controller 
is satisfied that the objection has not been removed within the 
period referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 29, a date for hearing 
the applicant shall be fixed forthwith and the applicant shall be 
given at least ten days’ notice of the date so fixed.
The applicant shall, as soon as possible, notify the Controller 
whether he will attend the hearing.
(2) After hearing the applicant, or without hearing if the applicant 
has not attended or has notified that he does not desire to be 
heard, the Controller may specify or permit such amendment of the 
specification as will be to his satisfaction to be made and may 
direct that reference to such other specification, as he shall 
mention shall be inserted in the applicant’s specification unless 
the amendment is made or agreed to within such period as he may fix.
Rule 31. Form of reference to another specification
When in pursuance of rule 30, the Controller directs that a 
reference to another specification shall be inserted in the 
applicant’s complete specification, such reference shall be inserted 
after the claims and shall be in the following form, namely: 
"Reference has been directed, in pursuance of section 18(2) of the 
Patents Act, 1970, to the specification filed in pursuance of 
application No 
"
39

--- PAGE 40 ---
Rule 32. Procedure in case of potential infringement
If in consequence of an investigation made under section 13, it 
appears to the Controller that the applicant’s invention cannot be 
performed without substantial risk of infringement of a claim of 
another patent, the applicant shall be so informed and the procedure 
provided in rule 29 shall, as far as may be necessary, be 
applicable.
Rule 33. Form of reference to another patent
Where the Controller directs that a reference to another patent 
shall be inserted in the applicant’s complete specification under 
sub-section (1) of section 19, such reference shall be inserted, 
after the claims in the following form, namely: 
"Reference has been directed, in pursuance of section 19(1) of the 
Patents Act, 1970, to Patent No 
"
Rule 34. Manner in which a claim under section 20(1) shall be made 
(1) A claim under sub-section (1) of section 20 shall be made in 
Form 6.
(2) The original assignment or agreement or an official copy or 
notarized copy thereof shall also be produced for the Controller’s 
inspection and the Controller may call for such other proof of title 
or written consent as he may require.
Rule 35. Manner in which a request may be made under section 20(4) 
(1) A request under sub-section (4) of 
section 
20 shall be made in 
Form 6.
(2) The request shall be accompanied by proof of death of the joint 
applicant and a certified copy of the probate of the will of the 
deceased or letters of administration in respect of his estate or 
any other document to prove that the person who gives the consent is 
the legal representative of the deceased applicant.
Rule 36. Manner of application under section 20(5)
(1) An application under sub-section (5) of section 20 shall be made 
in Form 6 in duplicate and shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting out fully the facts upon which the applicant relies and the 
directions which he seeks.
40

--- PAGE 41 ---
(2) A copy of the application and statement shall be sent by the 
Controller to every other joint applicant.
Rule 37. Numbering of applications on the grant of patent
On the grant of a patent, the application shall be accorded a number 
(called serial number) in the series of numbers accorded to patents 
under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 (2 of 1911), which
shall be the number of the patent so granted.
41

--- PAGE 42 ---
CHAPTER VI OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS
Rule 55. Opposition to the patent
(1) Representation for opposition under sub-section (1) of section 
25 shall be filed in Form 7(A) at the appropriate office with a copy 
to the applicant, and shall include a statement and evidence, if 
any, in support of the representation and a request for hearing, if 
so desired.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), no patent 
shall be granted before the expiry of a period of six months from 
the date of publication of the application under section 11A.
(2) The Controller shall consider such a representation only when a 
request for examination of the application has been filed.
(3) On consideration of the representation if the Controller is 
satisfied with that,
(a) no prima facie case is made out in the representation, he shall 
notify the opponent accordingly, and
(i) unless the opponent requests to be heard in the matter, the 
Controller shall, within one month from the date of such 
notification, pass an order recording the grounds for refusal of the 
representation;
(ii) if opponent requests for a hearing, the Controller shall, after 
giving the opponent an opportunity of being heard, pass an order 
within one month from the date of hearing, recording his reasons for 
refusal or prima facie acceptance of the representation and the 
applicant shall be notified accordingly.
(b) a prima facie case is made out in the representation, the 
Controller shall, within one month of receiving the representation, 
pass an order recording his reasons and notify the applicant 
accordingly.
(4) On receiving the notice under sub-rule (3), the applicant shall, 
if he so desires, file his statement and evidence, if any, in 
support of his application within two months from the date of the 
notice, with a copy to the opponent.
(5) On consideration of the statement and evidence filed by the 
applicant, the representation including the statement and evidence 
42

--- PAGE 43 ---
filed by the opponent, submissions made by the parties, and after 
hearing the parties, if so requested, the Controller may either 
reject the representation or require the complete specification and 
other documents to be amended to his satisfaction before the patent 
is granted or refuse to grant a patent on the application, by 
passing a speaking order to simultaneously decide on the application 
and the representation ordinarily within one month from the 
completion of above proceedings.
(5A) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (4) of rule 62 
shall, as far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under 
this rule.
(5B) An application for a patent, in which a representation for 
opposition has been filed and notice has been issued by the 
Controller under rule 3, shall be examined in accordance with rule 
24C.
(6) [omitted]
Rule 55A. Filing of notice of opposition
The notice of opposition to be given under sub-section (2) of 
section 25 shall be made in Form 7 and sent to the Controller in 
duplicate at the appropriate office.
Rule 56. Constitution of Opposition Board and its proceeding
(1) On receipt of notice of opposition under rule 55A, the 
Controller shall, by order, constitute an Opposition Board 
consisting of three members and nominate one of the members as the 
Chairman of the Board.
(2) An examiner appointed under sub-section (2) of section 73 shall 
be eligible to be a member of the Opposition Board.
(3) The examiner, who has dealt with the application for patent 
during the proceeding for grant of patent thereon shall not be 
eligible as member of Opposition Board as specified in sub-rule (2) 
for that application.
(4) The Opposition Board shall conduct the examination of the notice 
of opposition along with documents filed under rules 57 to 60 
43

--- PAGE 44 ---
referred to under sub-section (3) of section 25, submit a report 
with reasons on each ground taken in the notice of opposition with 
its joint recommendation within two months from the date on which 
the documents were forwarded to them.
Rule 57. Filing of written statement of opposition and evidence 
The opponent shall send a written statement in duplicate setting out 
the nature of the opponent’s interest, the facts upon which he bases 
his case and relief which he seeks and evidence, if any, along with 
notice of opposition and shall deliver to the patentee a copy 
of the 
statement and the evidence, if any.
Rule 58. Filing of reply statement and evidence
(1) If the patentee desires to contest the opposition, he shall 
leave at the appropriate office a reply statement setting out fully 
the grounds upon which the opposition is contested and evidence, if 
any, in support of his case within a period of two months from the 
date of receipt of the copy of the written statement and Opponent’s 
evidence, if any by him under rule 57 and deliver to the opponent a 
copy thereof.
(2) If the patentee does not desire to contest or leave his reply 
and evidence within the period as specified in sub-rule (1), the 
patent shall be deemed to have been revoked.
Rule 59. Filing of reply evidence by opponent
The opponent may, within one month from the date of delivery to him 
of a copy or the patentee’s reply statement and evidence under rule 
58, leave at the appropriate office evidence in reply strictly 
confined to matters in the patentee’s evidence and shall deliver to 
the patentee a copy of such evidence.
Rule 60. Further evidence to be left with the leave of the 
Controller
No further evidence shall be delivered by either party except with 
the leave or directions of the Controller: 
Provided that such leave or direction is prayed before the 
Controller has fixed the hearing under rule 62.
Rule 61. Copies of documents to be supplied
(1) Copies of all documents referred to in the notice of opposition 
44

--- PAGE 45 ---
or in any statement or evidence filed in connection with the 
opposition and authenticated to the satisfaction of the Controller, 
shall be simultaneously furnished in duplicate unless the Controller 
otherwise directs.
(2) Where a specification or other document in a language other than 
English is referred to in the notice, statement or evidence, an 
attested translation thereof, in duplicate, in English shall be 
furnished along with such notice, statement or evidence, as the case 
may be.
Rule 62. Hearing
(1) On the completion of the presentation of evidence, if any, and 
on receiving the recommendation of Opposition Board or at such other 
time as the Controller may think fit, he shall fix a date and time 
for the hearing of the opposition and shall give the parties not 
less than ten days’ notice of such hearing and may require members 
of Opposition Board to be present in the hearing.
(2) If either party to the proceeding desires to be heard, he shall 
inform the Controller by a notice along with the fee as specified in 
the First Schedule.
(3) The Controller may refuse to hear any party who has not given 
notice under sub-rule (2).
(4) If either party intends to rely on any publication at the 
hearing not already mentioned in the notice, statement or evidence, 
he shall give to the other party and to the Controller not less than 
five days’ notice of his intention, together with details of such 
publication.
(5) After hearing the party or parties desirous of being heard, or 
if neither party desires to be heard, then without hearing, and 
after taking into consideration the recommendation of Opposition 
Board, the Controller shall decide the opposition and notify his 
decision to the parties giving reasons therefor.
Rule 63. Determination of costs
If the patentee notifies the Controller that he desires to withdraw 
the patent after notice of opposition is given, the Controller, 
45

--- PAGE 46 ---
depending on the merits of the case, may decide whether costs should 
be awarded to the opponent.
Rule 63A. Request made under section 26(1)
Request under section 26(1) shall be made on Form 12 within three 
months from the date of the order of the Controller and shall be 
accompanied by a statement setting out the facts upon which the 
petitioner relies and relief he claims.
Rule 66. Form of making a request under section 28(2)
A request under sub-section (2) of section 28 shall be made in Form 
8.
Rule 67. Form of making a claim under section 28(3)
(1) A claim under sub-section (3) of section 28 shall be made in 
Form 8, and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the 
circumstances under which the claim is made.
(2) A copy of the claim and the statement shall be sent by the 
Controller to every applicant for the patent (not being the 
claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may consider 
to be interested.
Rule 68. Form of application to be made under section 28(7) 
(1) An application under sub-section (7) of section 28 shall be made 
in Form 8 and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the 
circumstances under which the application is made.
(2) A copy of the application and the statement shall be sent by the 
Controller to each patentee or the applicant for patent, as the case 
may be, and to any other person whom the Controller may consider to 
be interested.
Rule 69. Procedure for the hearing of claim or an application under 
section 28
The procedure specified in rules 55A and 57 to 63 relating to the 
filing of notice of opposition, written statement, reply statement, 
leaving evidence, hearing and cost shall, so far as may be, apply to 
the hearing of a claim or an application under section 28 as they 
apply to the opposition proceedings subject to the modification that 
reference to patentee shall be construed as the person making the 
46

--- PAGE 47 ---
claim, or an application, as the case may be.
Rule 70. Mention of inventor
Any mention of the inventor under sub-section (1) of section 28 
shall be made in the relevant documents in the following form 
namely:
"The inventor of this invention/substantial part of this invention 
within the meaning of section 28 of the Patents Act, 1970, is  
 
of  
".
Rule 70A. Certificate of inventorship
(1) The Controller may issue a certificate of inventorship to an 
inventor in respect of a patent in force, on a request made by the 
inventor in Form-8A along with fee specified in the First Schedule.
(2) The Controller may issue a duplicate certificate of inventorship 
to an inventor in respect of a patent in force on a request made by 
the inventor in Form-8A along with the fee specified in the First 
Schedule and such request shall contain a statement setting out the 
circumstances in which the original certificate of inventorship was 
lost, destroyed, damaged or cannot be produced.
47

--- PAGE 48 ---
CHAPTER VII SECRECY DIRECTIONS
Rule 71. Permission for making patent application outside India 
under section 39
(1) The request for permission for making patent application outside 
India shall be made in Form 25.
(2) The Controller shall dispose of the request made under sub-rule 
(1) within a period of twenty-one days 
from the date of filing of 
such request: Provided that in case of inventions relating to 
defence or atomic energy, the period of twenty-one days shall be 
counted from the date of receipt of consent from the Central 
Government.
Rule 72. Communication of result of reconsideration under section 
36(2)
(1) The result of every reconsideration under sub-section (1) of 
section 36 shall be communicated to the applicant for patent within 
fifteen days of the receipt of the notice by the Controller.
(2) Extension of time on revocation of secrecy directions under 
section 38. The extension of time to be given for doing anything 
required or authorised to be done under section 38 shall not exceed 
the period for which directions given by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 35 were in force.
48

--- PAGE 49 ---
CHAPTER VIII GRANT OF PATENTS
Rule 74. Form of patent
(1) A patent shall be in the form as specified in the Third Schedule 
with such modifications as the circumstances of each case may 
require and shall bear the number accorded to the application under 
rule 37.
(2) The patent certificate shall ordinarily be issued within seven 
days from the date of grant of patent under section 43.
Rule 74A. Inspection of documents related to grant of patent 
After the date of publication of a grant of a patent, the 
application together with the complete specification and provisional 
specification, if any, the drawing if any, abstract and other 
documents related thereto may be inspected at the appropriate office 
by making a written request to the Controller and on payment of fee 
and may obtain copies on payment of fee specified in the First 
Schedule.
Rule 75. Amendment of patent under section 44
An application under section 44 for the amendment of a patent shall 
be made in Form 10 along with substantiating evidence and be 
accompanied by the patent.
Rule 76. Manner of applying for direction under section 51(1)
(1) An application for directions under sub-section (1) of section 
51 shall be made in Form 11 and shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting out the facts upon which the applicant relies.
(2) A copy of the 
application 
and of 
the statement 
shall be sent 
the Controller to every other person registered as grantee or 
proprietor of the patent.
Rule 77. Manner of application under section 51(2)
(1) An application for directions 
under sub-section 
(2) of section 
51 shall be made in Form 11 and shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting out the facts upon which the applicant relies.
(2) A copy of the application and 
statement shall be sent by the 
Controller to the person in default.
49

--- PAGE 50 ---
Rule 78. Procedure for the hearing of proceedings under section 51 
The procedure specified in rules 55A and 57 to 63 relating to the 
filing of notice of opposition, written statement, reply statement, 
leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, as far as may be, apply 
to the hearing of an application under section 51 as they apply to 
the hearing of an opposition proceeding.
Rule 79. Request under section 52(2)
(1) A request under sub-section (2) of section 52 shall be made in 
Form 12 within three months from the date of the order of the 
Appellate Board or court referred to in sub-section (1) of the said 
section and shall be accompanied by a statement setting out the 
facts upon which the petitioner relies and the relief he claims and 
a certified copy of the order of the Appellate Board or court.
(2) Where the Appellate Board or court has ordered the grant of 
patent to the applicant only for a part of the invention, the new 
patent granted shall be accorded a number in the same series of 
numbers accorded to the complete specifications accepted on the same 
day as the patent is granted.
Rule 80. Renewal fees under section 53
(1) To keep a patent in force, the renewal fees specified in the 
First Schedule shall be payable at the expiration of the second year 
from the date of the patent or of any succeeding year and the same 
shall be remitted to the patent office before the expiration of the 
second or the succeeding year.
(1A) The period for payment of renewal fees so specified in sub-rule 
(1) may be extended to such a period not being more than six months 
if the request for such extension of time is made in Form 4 with the 
fee specified in the First Schedule.
(2) While paying the renewal fee, the number and date of the patent 
concerned and the year in respect of which the fee is paid shall be 
quoted.
(3) The annual renewal fees payable in respect of two or more years 
may be paid in advance.
Provided that where the renewal fees is paid in advance through 
50

--- PAGE 51 ---
electronic mode for a period of at least 4 years, a ten per cent 
reduction in fee shall be applicable for such renewal.
(4) The Controller shall, after making such an enquiry as he may 
deem necessary, credit any renewal fee and issue a certificate that 
the fee has been paid.
51

--- PAGE 52 ---
CHAPTER IX AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION, SPECIFICATION OR ANY DOCUMENT
RELATING THERETO
Rule 81. Amendment of application, specification or any document 
relating thereto
(1) An application under section 57 for the amendment of an 
application for a patent or a complete specification or any document 
related thereto shall be made in Form 13.
(2) If the application for amendment under sub-rule (1) relates to 
an application for a patent which has not been granted, the 
Controller shall determine whether and subject to what conditions, 
if any, the amendment shall be allowed.
(3) (a) If the application for amendment under sub-rule (1) is made 
after grant of patent and the nature of the proposed amendment is 
substantive, the application shall be published.
(b) Any person interested in opposing the application for amendment 
shall give a notice of opposition in Form 14 within three months 
from the date of publication of the application.
(c) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing 
of a written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing 
and costs shall, as far as may be, apply to the hearing of the 
opposition under section 57 as they apply to the hearing of an 
opposition proceeding.
Rule 82. Preparation of amended specifications, etc.
Where the Controller allows the application for a patent or the 
complete specification or any other document to be amended, the 
applicant shall, if the Controller so requires and within the time 
to be specified by him, leave at the appropriate office an amended 
application or the specification or the other document, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
Rule 83. Publication of the amendment allowed
The amendments allowed after a patent has been granted shall be 
published.
52

--- PAGE 53 ---
CHAPTER X RESTORATION OF PATENTS
Rule 84. Restoration of patents
(1) An application for the restoration of a patent under section 60 
shall be made in Form 15.
(2) Where the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case for 
the restoration of any patent has not been made out, he shall 
intimate the applicant accordingly and unless the applicant makes a 
request to be heard in the matter within one month from the date of 
such intimation, the Controller shall refuse the application.
(3) Where applicant requests for a hearing within the 
time allowed 
and the Controller, after giving the applicant such a hearing, is 
prima facie satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fees was 
unintentional, he shall publish the application.
Rule 85. Opposition to restoration under section 61 
(1) At any time, within two months from the date of publication of 
the application under sub-rule (3) of rule 84, any person interested 
may give notice of opposition thereto in Form 14.
(2) A copy of the notice of opposition shall be sent by the 
Controller to the applicant.
(3) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing 
of written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and 
costs shall, as far as may be, apply to the hearing of the 
opposition under section 60 as they apply to the hearing in the 
opposition proceeding.
Rule 86. Payment of unpaid renewal fees
(1) Where the Controller decides in favour of the applicant, the 
applicant shall pay the unpaid renewal fees and the additional fee 
specified in the First Schedule, within a month from the date of the 
order of the Controller allowing the application for restoration.
(2) The Controller shall publish his decision.
53

--- PAGE 54 ---
CHAPTER XI SURRENDER OF PATENTS
Rule 87. Surrender of Patents
(1) The Controller shall publish the notice of an offer given under 
section 63.
(2) Any person interested may, within three months from the date of 
publication of the notice, give notice of opposition to the 
Controller in Form 14 in duplicate.
(3) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 relating to the filing 
of written statement, reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and 
costs shall, as far as may be, apply to the hearing of the 
opposition under section 63 as they apply to the hearing in 
opposition proceeding.
(4) If the Controller accepts the patentee’s offer to surrender the 
patent, he may direct the patentee to return the patent, and on 
receipt of such patent, the Controller shall by order revoke it and 
publish the revocation of the patent.
54

--- PAGE 55 ---
CHAPTER XII REGISTER OF PATENTS
Rule 88. Register of patents under section 67
(1) Upon the grant of a patent, the Controller shall enter in the 
register of patents at each appropriate office, the name, address 
and nationality of the grantee as the patentee thereof, the title of 
the invention (including the categories to which the invention 
relates), the date of the patent and the date of grant thereof 
together with the address for service of the patentee.
(2) The Controller shall also enter in the register of patents 
particulars regarding proceedings under the Act before the 
Controller or Appellate Board or the courts in respect of every 
patent.
(3) Where the register of patents or any part thereof is in computer 
floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form it shall be 
maintained and accessed only by the person who is duly authorised by 
the Controller and no entry or alteration of any entry or 
rectification of any entry in the said register shall be made by any 
person who is not so authorised by the Controller.
Rule 90. Registration of title and interest in patents
(1) An application referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
of section 69 shall be made in Form 16.
(2) An application for an entry in the register of patents of any 
other document purporting to affect the proprietorship of the patent 
by the person benefiting under the document shall be made in Form 
16.
Rule 91. Presentation of assignment, etc., of patent to Controller
Every assignment and every other document giving effect to or being 
evidence of the transfer of a patent or affecting the proprietorship 
thereof or creating an interest therein as claimed in such 
application, shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be 
presented to him together with the application which shall be 
accompanied by two copies of the assignment or other document 
certified to be true copies by the applicant or his agent and the 
Controller may call for such other proof of title or written consent 
as he may require.
55

--- PAGE 56 ---
Rule 92. Registration of title or interest in a patent 
After the receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or sub­
section (2) of section 69, the Controller shall register the title 
of the person concerned or his interest in a patent, as the case may 
be, and an entry in the following form shall be made in the 
register, namely: 
"In pursuance of an application received on the  
 
Proprietor  
Assignment  
registered as  
licencee  
 
by virtue of  
licence  
Mortgagee etc.  
Mortgage deed 
etc.  
dated  
and made between  
of the one part 
and  
of the other part."
Rule 93. Entry of renewal fee
Upon receipt of the payment of the prescribed renewal fee in respect 
of a patent, the Controller shall enter into the register of patents 
the fact that the fee has been paid and the date of payment of such 
fee and issue a certificate of renewal of the patent.
Rule 94. Alteration of address
(1) A patentee may make a request in writing along with the 
fee 
payable to the Controller for the alteration of his name, 
nationality, address or address for service as entered in the 
register of patents in respect of any patent granted to him. The 
Controller may require such proof of the alteration as he may think 
fit before acting on a request to alter the name or nationality.
(2) If the Controller allows a request made under sub-rule (1), he 
shall cause the entries in the register to be altered accordingly.
(3) If a patentee makes a request in writing along with fee payable 
for entering an additional address for service in India and if the 
Controller is satisfied that the request should be allowed, he shall 
have the additional address for service entered in the register.
Rule 95. Inspection of register of patents under section 72 and fees 
payable therefor
(1) The register of patents shall be open for public inspection 
during office hours on payment of the fees specified therefor in the 
First Schedule.
56

--- PAGE 57 ---
(2) When register of patents or any part thereof is in computer 
floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form the person 
authorised by the Controller under sub-rule (3) of rule 88 shall 
provide access to the computer floppies, diskettes or other 
electronic form or printouts of the records thereof.
57

--- PAGE 58 ---
CHAPTER XIII COMPULSORY LICENCE AND REVOCATION OF PATENT
Rule 96. Application for compulsory licence etc.
An application to the Controller for an order under section 84, 
section 85, section 91 or section 92 or section 92A shall be in Form
17, or Form 19, as the case may be. Except in the case of an 
application made by the Central Government, the application shall 
set out the nature of the applicant’s interest and terms and 
conditions of the licence the applicant is willing to accept.
Rule 97. When a prima facie case is not made out
(1) If, 
upon consideration of the evidence, the Controller is 
satisfied that a prima facie case has not been made out for the 
making of an order under any of the sections referred to in rule 96, 
he shall notify the applicant accordingly, and unless the applicant 
requests to be heard in the matter, within one month from the date 
of such notification, the Controller shall refuse the application.
(2) If the applicant requests for a hearing within the time allowed 
under sub-rule (1), the Controller shall, after giving the applicant 
an opportunity of being heard, determine whether the application may 
be proceeded with or whether it shall be refused.
Rule 98. Notice of opposition under section 87(2)
(1) A notice of opposition under sub-section (2) of section 87 shall 
be given in Form 14 and shall be sent to the Controller within two 
months from the date of the publication of the application under 
sub-section (1) of the said section.
(2) The notice of opposition referred to in sub-rule (1) shall 
include the terms and conditions of the licence, if any, the 
opponent is prepared to grant to the applicant and shall be 
accompanied by evidence in support of the opposition.
(3) The opponent shall serve a copy of his notice of opposition and 
evidence on the applicant and notify the Controller when such 
service has been effected.
(4) No further statement or evidence shall be delivered by either 
party except with the leave of or on requisition by the Controller. 
58

--- PAGE 59 ---
(5) The Controller shall forthwith fix a date and time for the 
hearing of the case and shall give the parties not less than ten 
days’ notice of such hearing.
(6) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62, 
shall, as far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under 
this rule as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.
Rule 99. Manner of publication of the revocation order
The Controller shall publish the order made by him under sub-section 
(3) of section 85 revoking a patent.
Rule 100. Application under section 88(4)
(1) An application under sub-section (4) of section 88 for the 
revision of the terms and conditions of a licence which have been 
settled by the Controller shall be in Form 20 and shall state the 
facts relied upon by the applicant and the relief he seeks and shall 
be accompanied by evidence in support of the application.
(2) If the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case has not 
been made out for the revision of the terms and conditions of the 
licence, he may notify the applicant accordingly and unless within a 
month the applicant requests to be heard in the matter, the 
Controller may refuse the application.
(3) The Controller, after giving the applicant an opportunity of 
being heard, shall determine whether the application shall be 
proceeded with or whether the application shall be refused.
Rule 101. Procedure to be followed in case of applications under 
section 88(4)
(1) If the Controller allows the application to be proceeded with, 
he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the application and 
of the evidence in support thereof upon the patentee or any other 
person appearing in the register to be interested in the patent or 
upon any other person on whom, in his opinion such copies should be 
so served.
(2) The applicant shall inform the Controller the date on which the 
service of copies of application and of the evidence on the patentee 
and other persons referred to in sub-rule (1) has been effected.
59

--- PAGE 60 ---
(3) The patentee or any other person on whom copies of the 
application and of the evidence have been served, may give to the 
Controller notice of opposition in Form 14 within one month from the 
date of such service. Such notice shall contain the grounds relied 
upon by the opponent and shall be accompanied by evidence in support 
of the opposition.
(4) The opponent shall serve copies of the notice of opposition and 
his evidence on the applicant and inform the Controller the date on 
which such service has been effected.
(5) No further evidence or statement shall be filed by either party 
except with special leave of or on requisition by the Controller.
(6) On completion of the above proceedings, the Controller shall 
forthwith fix a date and the time for the hearing of the case and 
shall give the parties not less than ten days’ notice of such 
hearing.
(7) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62 
shall, as far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under 
this rule as they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.
(8) If the Controller decides to revise the terms and conditions of 
licence he shall forthwith amend the licence granted to the 
applicant in such manner, as he may deem necessary.
Rule 102. Application for termination of compulsory licence under 
section 94
(1) An application for termination of compulsory licence under 
section 94(1) shall be made in Form 21 by the patentee or any other 
person deriving title or interest in the patent. The application 
shall be accompanied by the evidence in support of the application.
(2) The applicant shall serve a copy of the application and evidence 
on the holder of the compulsory licence and shall inform the 
Controller the date on which the service has been effected.
(3) The holder of the compulsory licence may file his objection 
along with evidence, if any, to the application within one month 
60

--- PAGE 61 ---
from the date of receipt of the application and evidence by him to 
the Controller and serve a copy thereof to the applicant.
(4) No 
further evidence or statement shall 
be filed by either party 
except with special leave of or on requisition by the Controller.
(5) On 
completion of the above proceedings, the Controller shall 
forthwith fix a date and the time for the hearing of the case and 
shall give the parties not less than ten days’ notice of such 
hearing.
(6) The procedure specified in sub-rules (2) to (5) of rule 62 as 
far as may be, apply to the procedure for hearing under this rule as 
they apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings.
(7) If the Controller decides to terminate the compulsory licence he 
shall forthwith issue an order giving terms and conditions, if any, 
of such termination and serve copies of the order to both the 
parties.
61

--- PAGE 62 ---
CHAPTER XIV SCIENTIFIC ADVISERS
Rule 103. Roll of scientific advisers
(1) The Controller shall maintain a roll of scientific advisers for 
the purpose of section 115. The roll shall be updated annually. The 
roll shall contain the names, addresses, specimen signatures and 
photographs of scientific advisers, their designations, information 
regarding their educational qualifications, the disciplines of their 
specialisation and their technical, practical and research 
experience.
(2) A person shall 
be 
qualified to have his name entered 
in the roll 
of scientific advisers, if he
(i) holds a degree 
in 
science, engineering or technology 
or 
equivalent;
(ii) has at least fifteen years technical, practical or research 
experience; and
(iii) he holds or has held a responsible post in a scientific or 
technical department of the Central or State Government or in any 
organisation.
Rule 103A. Disqualifications for inclusion in the roll of scientific 
advisers
A person shall not be eligible to be included in the roll of 
scientific advisors, if he
(i)has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind;
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent;
(iii) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court 
a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was caused by 
misfortune without any misconduct on his part;
(iv) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or 
outside India of an offence to undergo a term of imprisonment, 
unless the offence of which he has been convicted has been pardoned 
or unless on an application made by him, the Central Government has, 
by order in this behalf, removed the disability; or
(v) has been guilty of professional misconduct.
Rule 104. Manner of application for inclusion in the roll of 
scientific advisers
Any interested person may apply to the Controller for inclusion of 
his name in the roll of scientific advisers by furnishing his bio­
data.
62

--- PAGE 63 ---
Rule 105. Inclusion of the name of any other person in the roll of 
scientific advisers
The Controller may, notwithstanding anything contained in rules 103 
and 104, enter the name of any person in the roll of scientific 
advisers, if he is of the opinion after such inquiry as he deems 
fit, that such person should be entered in the roll of scientific 
advisers.
Rule 106. Power to relax
Where the Controller is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, he may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, relax any of the qualifications specified in sub-rule (2) 
of rule 103 with respect to any person, if such person is otherwise 
well qualified.
Rule 107. Removal of names from the roll of scientific advisers 
The Controller may remove the name of any person from the roll of 
scientific advisers, if
(a) such person makes a request for such removal; or
(b) the Controller is satisfied that his name has been entered in 
the roll by error or on account of misrepresentation or suppression 
of any material fact; or
(c) such person has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to a 
term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his 
professional capacity and the Controller is of the opinion that his 
name should be removed from the roll; or
(d) such person is dead: Provided that except in the cases falling 
under clause (a) and (d) above, before removing the name of any 
person from the roll of scientific advisers under this rule, such 
person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
63

--- PAGE 64 ---
CHAPTER XV PATENT AGENTS
Rule 108. Particulars to be contained in the register of patent 
agents
(1) The register of patent agents maintained under section 125 shall 
contain the name, nationality, address of the principal place of 
business, addresses of branch offices, if any, the qualifications, 
the date of registration of every registered patent agent and the 
details of their renewal of registration and any other particulars 
so specified by the Controller.
(2) Where the register of patent agents is in computer floppies, 
diskettes or any other electronic form, it shall be maintained and 
accessed only by the person who is duly authorised by the Controller 
and no entry or alteration of any entry or rectification of any 
entry in the said register shall be made by any person who is not so 
authorised by the Controller.
(3) (i) Copies of register of patent agents shall be maintained in 
each of the branch offices;
(ii) The register of patent agents shall also contain specimen 
signatures and photographs of the persons registered as patent 
agents.
Rule 109. Application for registration of patent agents
(1) Every person who desires to be registered as a patent agent 
shall make an application in Form 22.
(2) The applicant shall furnish such other information as may be 
required by the Controller.
(3) A person desirous to appear in the qualifying examination under 
rule 110 shall make a request to the Controller along with the fee 
specified in the First Schedule after announcement of such 
examination and within the period as may be specified in the 
announcement.
Rule 110. Particulars of the qualifying examination for patent 
agents
(1) The qualifying examination referred to in clause (c)(ii) of sub­
section (1) of section 126 shall consist of a written test and a
64

--- PAGE 65 ---
viva voce examination.
(2) The qualifying examination shall consist of the following papers 
and marks, namely:
Paper I -The Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), The Patents Rules, 
2003, The Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000) and The Designs Rules, 2001 
Paper II-Drafting and interpretation of patent specifications, 
design specifications and other documents.
Viva Voce.
(3) A candidate shall be required to secure a minimum of fifty marks 
in paper I and paper II and shall be declared to have passed the 
examination only, if he obtains an aggregate of sixty percent of the 
total marks.
Rule 111. Registration of patent agents
After a candidate passes the qualifying examination specified in 
rule 110 and after obtaining any further information which the 
Controller considers necessary he shall, on receipt of the fee 
specified therefor in the First Schedule, enter the candidate’s name 
in the register of patent agents and issue to him a certificate of 
registration as a patent agent.
Rule 111A. Issue of duplicate certificate of patent agents
The Controller may issue a duplicate certificate of registration as 
patent agent on a request made by the person so registered as patent 
agent along with fee specified in the First Schedule and contain a 
statement setting out the circumstances in which the original 
certificate issued under rule 111 was lost, destroyed and cannot be 
produced.
Rule 112. Details to be included in an application for the 
registration of a patent agent
An application by a person entitled to be registered as a patent 
agent under sub-section (2) of section 126 shall also be made in 
Form 22.
Rule 113. Registration of patent agents under section 126(2)
On receipt of an application for the registration of a person as a 
patent agent under rule 112, the Controller may if he is satisfied 
that the said person fulfils the conditions specified in sub-section 
65

--- PAGE 66 ---
(2) of section 126 enter his name in the register of patent agents.
Rule 114. Disqualifications for registration as a patent agent
A person shall not be eligible to be registered as a patent agent, 
if he
(i) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind;
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent;
(iii) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court 
a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was caused by 
misfortune without any misconduct on his part;
(iv) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or 
outside India of an offence to undergo a term of imprisonment, 
unless the offence of which he has been convicted has been pardoned 
or unless on an application made by him, the Central Government has 
by order in this behalf, removed the disability;
(v) being a legal practitioner has been guilty of professional 
misconduct; or
(vi) being a chartered accountant, has been guilty of negligence or 
misconduct.
Rule 115. Payment of fees
The continuance of a person’s name in the register of patent agents 
shall be subject to the payment of the fees specified therefor in 
the First Schedule.
Rule 116. Removal of a name from the register of patent agents
(1) The Controller may delete from the register of patent agents, 
the name of any patent agent
(a) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or
(b) when he is dead; or
(c) when the Controller has removed the name of a person under sub­
section (1) of section 130; or
(d) if he has defaulted in the payment of fees specified in rule 
115, by more than three months after they are due; or
(e) if he ceases to be a citizen of India:
Provided that except under clause (a) and (b), before removing the 
name of any person from the register of patent agents under this 
rule, such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.
(2) The removal of the name of any person from the register of 
66

--- PAGE 67 ---
patent agents shall be published and shall be, where relevant 
forthwith communicated to the person concerned.
Rule 117. Restoration of name of persons removed from the register 
of patent agents
(1) An application for the restoration of the name of any person 
removed from the register of patent agents under sub-section (2) of 
section 130 shall be made in Form 23 within two months from the date 
of such removal.
(2) If the name of a person is restored to the register of patent 
agents, his name shall be continued therein for a period of one year 
from the date on which his last annual fee became due.
(3) The restoration of a name to the register of patent agents shall 
be communicated to the patent agent and also published on the 
official website.
Rule 118. Alteration of names, etc., in the register of patent 
agents
(1) A patent agent may apply for the alteration of his name, address 
of the principal place of business and branch offices, if any, or 
the qualifications entered in the register of patent agents, e-mail 
address, telephone number, fax number or any other particulars under 
sub-section (1) of section 125. On receipt of such application and 
the fee specified therefor in the First Schedule for such request 
for alteration of particulars, the Controller shall cause the 
necessary alterations to be made in the register of patent agents.
(2) Every alteration made in the register of patent agents shall be 
published.
Rule 119. Refusal to recognise as patent agent
If the Controller is of the opinion that any person should not be 
recognised as a patent agent in respect of any business under the 
Act as provided in sub-section (1) of section 131 thereof, he shall 
communicate his reasons to that person and direct him to show cause 
why he should not refuse to recognise him as such agent, within such 
time as he may allow, and after considering the reply, if any, of 
that person and giving him an opportunity of being heard, the 
Controller may pass such orders as he may deem fit.
67

--- PAGE 68 ---
Rule 120. Publication of the names of patent agents, registered 
under the Act
The names and addresses of persons registered as patent agents shall
from time to time be published.
68

--- PAGE 69 ---
CHAPTER XVI MISCELLANEOUS
Rule 121. Period within which copies of specification etc. are to be 
filed
The period within which copies of specification or corresponding 
documents to be filed by the applicant under sub-section (1) of 
section 138 shall be three months from the date of communication by 
the Controller.
Rule 121A. Address of Communications
All communications in relation to any proceeding under the Act or 
these rules shall be addressed to the Controller at the appropriate 
office.
Rule 122. Correction of clerical errors
A request for the correction of a clerical error in any document 
referred to in section 78 shall be accompanied by a copy of the 
document highlighting the corrections clearly along with the fees 
payable therefor as specified in the First Schedule.
Rule 123. Manner of advertisement of the proposed correction of any 
error
Where the Controller requires a notice of the nature of the proposed 
correction to be advertised, the request and the nature of the 
proposed correction shall be published and the person making the 
request shall also serve copies of the request and the copies of the 
document showing the proposed corrections to such persons who, in 
the opinion of the Controller, may be interested.
Rule 124. Manner and time of opposition to the making of corrections 
(1) Any person interested may, at any time, within 
three months from 
the date of the advertisement of the request for correction give 
notice of opposition to the Controller in Form 14 in duplicate.
(2) Such notice of opposition shall be accompanied by a statement in 
duplicate setting out the nature of the opponent’s interest, the 
facts on which he relies and the relief which he seeks.
(3) A copy of the notice and of the statement shall be sent by the 
Controller to the person making the request.
69

--- PAGE 70 ---
(4) The procedure specified in rules 58 to 63 relating to the filing 
of reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, as 
far as may be, apply to the hearing of the opposition under section 
78 as they apply in the hearing of the opposition proceeding.
Rule 125. Notification of corrections
The Controller shall notify the person making a request for the 
correction and the opponent, if any, of the corrections made in the 
relevant document.
Rule 126. Form, etc., of affidavits
(1) The affidavits required by the Act or these rules to be filed at 
the patent office or furnished to the Controller shall be duly sworn 
to in the manner as prescribed in sub-rule (3).
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the deponent 
is 
able, of his own knowledge, to prove except in interlocutory 
matters, where statements of belief of the deponent may be admitted, 
provided that the grounds thereof are given.
(3) Affidavits shall be sworn to as follows:
(a) in India before any court or person having by law authority to 
receive evidence, or before any officer empowered by such court as 
aforesaid to administer oaths or to take affidavits;
(b) in any country or place outside India before a diplomatic or 
consular officer, within the meaning of the Diplomatic and Consular 
Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 (41 of 1948) in such country or 
place or before a notary of the country or place, recognised by the 
Central Government under section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 
1952), or before a judge or magistrate of the country or place.
(4) Alterations and interlineations shall, before an affidavit is 
sworn to or affirmed be authenticated by the initials of the person 
before whom the affidavit is sworn to.
Rule 127. Exhibits
Where there are exhibits to be filed in an opposition or any other 
proceedings, a copy or impression of each exhibit shall be supplied 
to the other party at his request and expense; if copies or 
impressions of the exhibits cannot conveniently be furnished, the 
originals shall be left with the Controller for inspection by the 
70

--- PAGE 71 ---
person interested by prior appointment.
The exhibits in original if not already left with the Controller 
shall be produced at the hearing.
Rule 128. Directions not otherwise prescribed
(1) Where for the proper prosecution or completion of any 
proceedings under the Act or these rules, the Controller is of the 
opinion that it is necessary for a party to such proceedings to 
perform an act, file a document or produce evidence, for which 
provision has not been made in the Act or these rules, he may, by 
notice in writing, require such party to perform the act, file the 
document or produce the evidence specified in such notice.
(2) Where an applicant or a party to a proceeding desires to be 
heard or not heard, the Controller may, at any time, require him to 
submit his statement in writing giving such information as the 
Controller may deem necessary within the time specified by him.
Rule 129. Exercise of discretionary power by the Controller
Before exercising any discretionary power under the Act or these 
rules which is likely to affect an applicant for a patent or a party 
to a proceeding adversely, the Controller shall give such applicant 
or party, a hearing, after giving him or them, ten days’ notice of 
such hearing ordinarily.
Rule 129A. Adjournment of hearing
An applicant for patent or a party to a proceeding may make a 
request for adjournment of the hearing with reasonable cause along 
with the prescribed fee prescribed in First Schedule, at least three 
days before the date of hearing and the Controller, if he thinks fit 
to do so, and upon such terms as he may direct, may adjourn the 
hearing and intimate the parties accordingly: Provided that no party 
shall be given more than two adjournments and each adjournment shall 
not be for more than thirty days.
Rule 130. Application for review of decisions or setting aside of 
orders of the Controller
(1) An application to the Controller for the review of his decision 
under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 77 shall be made in 
Form 24 within one month from the date of communication of such 
decision to the applicant or within such further period not 
71

--- PAGE 72 ---
exceeding one month thereafter as the Controller may on a request 
made in Form 4 allow and shall be accompanied by a statement setting 
forth the grounds on which the review is sought. Where the decision 
in question concerns any other person in addition to the applicant, 
the Controller shall forthwith transmit a copy of each of the 
application and the statement to the other person concerned.
(2) An application to the Controller for setting aside an order 
passed by him ex-parte under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of 
section 77 shall be made in Form 24 within one month from the date 
of communication of such order to the applicant or within such 
further period not exceeding one month as the Controller may on a 
request made in Form 4 allow and shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting forth the grounds on which the application is based. Where 
the order concerns any other person in addition to the applicant, 
the Controller shall, forthwith transmit a copy each of the 
application and the statement to the other person concerned.
Rule 131. Form and manner in which statements required under section 
146(2) to be furnished
(1) The statements shall be furnished by every patentee and every 
licensee under sub-section (2) of section 146 in Form 27 which shall 
be duly verified by the patentee or the licencee or his authorised 
agent.
(2) The statements referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be furnished 
once in respect of every period of three financial years starting 
from the financial year commencing immediately after the financial 
year in which the patent was granted, and shall be furnished within 
six months from the expiry of such period. Provided that the 
Controller may condone the delay or extend the time in filing of 
such statement for a period up to three months upon a request made 
in Form 4.
(3) The Controller may publish the information received by him under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 146.
Rule 132. Form of application for the issue of a duplicate patent 
An application for the issue of a duplicate patent under section 154 
shall contain a statement setting out the circumstances in which the 
patent was lost or destroyed or cannot be produced together with the 
72

--- PAGE 73 ---
fee as specified therefor in the First Schedule.
Rule 133. Supply of certified copies and certificates under sections 
72 and 147
(1) Certified copies of any entry in the register, or certificates 
of, or extracts from patents, specifications and other public 
documents in the patent office, or from registers and other records 
including records in computer floppies, diskettes or any other 
electronic form kept there, may be furnished by the Controller on a 
request therefor made to him and on payment of the fee specified 
therefor in the First Schedule:
Provided that certified copies shall be issued in the order in which 
the request is filed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), certified 
copies shall be furnished within a period of one week if such 
request is made along with the fee specified therefore in the First 
Schedule.
Rule 134. Request for information under section 153
(1) A request for information in respect of the following matters 
relating to any patent or application for patent shall be 
admissible, namely:
(a) as to when a complete specification following a provisional 
specification has been filed or an application for patent has been 
deemed to have been abandoned;
(aa) as to when the information under section 8 has been filed.
(b) as to when publication of application has been made under 
section 11A;
(c) as to when an application has been withdrawn under section 11B;
(d) as to when a request for examination has been made under section 
11B;
(e) as to when the examination report has been issued under section 
12;
(f) as to when an application for patent has been refused;
(g) as to when a patent has been granted;
(h) as to when a renewal fee has been paid;
(i) as to when the term of a patent has expired or shall expire;
(j) as to when an entry has been made in the register or application 
has been made for the making of such entry; or
(k) as to when any application is made or action taken involving an 
73

--- PAGE 74 ---
entry in the register, publication in the Official Journal or 
otherwise, if the nature of the application or action is specified 
in the request.
(2) Separate request shall be made in respect of each item of 
information required.
(3) The fee payable on a request to be made under section 153 shall 
be as set out in the First Schedule.
Rule 135. Agency
(1) The authorisation of an agent for the purposes of the Act and 
these rules shall be filed in Form 26 or in the form of a power of 
attorney within a period of three months from the date of filing of 
such application or document, failing which no action shall be taken 
on such application or documents for further processing till such 
deficiency is removed.
(2) Where any authorisation has been made under sub-rule (1), 
service upon the agent of any document relating to any proceeding or 
matter under the Act or these rules shall be deemed to be service 
upon the person so authorising him and all communications directed 
to be made to a person in respect of any proceeding or matter may be 
addressed to such agent, and all appearances before the Controller 
relating thereto may be made by or through such agent.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) and (2), the 
Controller may, if it is considered necessary, require the personal 
signature or presence of an applicant, opponent or party to such 
proceeding or matter.
Rule 136. Scale of costs
(1) In all proceedings before the Controller, he may, subject to 
rule 63, award costs as he considers reasonable, having regard to 
all the circumstances of the case:
Provided that the amount of costs awarded in respect of any matter 
set forth in the Fourth Schedule shall not exceed the amount 
specified therein.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the 
Controller may, in his discretion award a compensatory cost in any 
proceeding before him which in his opinion is false or vexatious.
74

--- PAGE 75 ---
Rule 137. Powers of Controller generally
(1) Any document for the amendment of which no special provision is 
made in the Act may be amended and any irregularity in procedure 
which in the opinion of the Controller may be obviated without 
detriment to the interests of any person, may be corrected if the 
Controller thinks fit and upon such terms as he may direct.
(2) The provisions contained in sub-rule (1) shall not be applicable 
for matters related to-
(i) extension of time or condonation of delay under sub-rule (5) of 
rule 12;
(ii) clause (i) of sub-rule (4) and sub-rule (6) of rule 20;
(iii) rule 21;
(iv) sub-rules (1), (5) and (6) of rule 24B;
(v) sub-rules (10) and (11) of rule 24C;
(vi) sub-rule (4) of Rule 55;
(vii) sub-rule (1A) of rule 80;
(viii) sub-rules (1) and (2) of rule 130;
(ix) sub-rule(2) of rule 131.
Rule 138. Power to extend time specified or condone delay 
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the time 
specified for doing any act or taking any proceeding thereunder may 
be extended or any delay may be condoned by the Controller for a 
period of up to six months, upon a request made in Form 4, where 
such request is made before the expiry of the said period of six 
months:
Provided that such request may be made any number of times within 
the specified period of six months.
Rule 139. Hearing before the Controller to be in public in certain 
cases
Where the hearing before the Controller of any dispute between two 
or more parties relating to an application for a patent or to any 
matter in connection with a patent takes place after the date of the 
publication of the complete specification, the hearing of the 
dispute shall be in public unless the Controller, after consultation 
with the parties to the dispute who appear in person or are 
represented at the hearing, otherwise directs.
75

--- PAGE 76 ---
THE FIRST SCHEDULE FEE (See Rule 7)
Table I Fees Payable
No.
On what
No.
For e-filing
For physical filing
of 
entr
payable
of 
the
Natural 
person or
Other(s), 
alone
Natural 
person or
Other(s), 
alone
y
rel 
eva 
nt
For 
m
Startup 
or Small 
entity or 
education 
al 
instituti 
on
or with 
natural 
person or 
Startup 
or Small 
entity or 
education 
al 
instituti 
on
Startup 
or Small 
entity or 
education 
al 
instituti 
on
or with 
natural 
person or 
Startup 
or Small 
entity or 
education 
al 
instituti 
on
1
2
3
4
Rupees
5 
Rupees
6
Rupees
7
Rupees
.
On 
applicatio 
n for a 
patent
1
1600
Multiple 
of 1600
8000
Multiple 
of 8000
1750
Multiple 
of 1750
8800
Multiple 
of 8800
under
in case
in case
in case
in case
section 7, 
54 or 135 
and rule
20(1) 
accompanie 
d by
provisiona 
l or 
complete 
specificat 
ion
of every 
multiple 
priority.
of every 
multiple 
priority.
of every 
multiple 
priority.
of every 
multiple 
priority.
(i) for 
each sheet 
of
specificat 
ion in 
addition
to 30; 
excluding 
sequence 
listing of 
nucleotide 
s and/or 
amino acid 
sequence 
under sub- 
rule(3) of 
rule(9)
(i) 160
(i) 800
(i) 180
(i) 880
(ii) for 
each claim
(ii) 320
(ii) 1600
(ii) 350
(ii) 1750
76

--- PAGE 77 ---
in 
addition
to 10
(iii) for 
each page 
of 
sequence
listing of 
nucleotide 
s and/or
amino acid 
sequence 
under sub-
rule(3) of 
rule(9)
(iii) 160 
subject 
to a 
maximum 
of 24000
(iii) 800 
subject 
to a 
maximum 
of 120000
(iii) Not 
allowed
(iii) Not 
allowed
*An 
applicatio 
n for a 
patent 
made under 
section 54 
shall be 
eligible 
for a 
reduction 
of 50 per 
cent in 
fee as 
compared 
to other 
applicatio 
ns.
.
On filing 
complete 
specificat 
ion after 
provisiona 
l up to 30 
pages 
having up 
to 10 
claims
2
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
(i) for 
each sheet 
of 
specificat 
ion in 
addition
to 30, 
excluding 
sequence 
listing of 
nucleotide
(i) 160
(i) 800
(i) 180
(i) 880
77

--- PAGE 78 ---
s and/or 
amino acid 
sequence 
under sub-
rule(3) of 
rule(9)
(ii) for 
each claim 
in 
addition 
to 10
(ii) 320
(ii) 1600
(ii) 350
(ii) 1800
(iii) for 
each page 
of 
sequence
listing of 
nucleotide 
s and/or
amino acid 
sequence 
under sub-
rule(3) of 
rule(9)
(iii) 160 
subject 
to a 
maximum 
of 24000
(iii) 800 
subject 
to a 
maximum
of 120000
(iii) Not 
allowed
(iii) Not 
allowed
Note: A 
specificat 
ion in 
respect of 
an 
applicatio 
n for a 
patent 
made under 
section 54 
shall be 
eligible 
for a 
reduction 
of 50 per 
cent in 
fee as 
compared 
to other 
specificat 
ions.
3.
On filing 
a 
statement 
and 
undertakin 
g under 
section 8
3
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
4.
(i) On 
request
4
480
2400
530
2600
78

--- PAGE 79 ---
for
extension 
of time
under 
sections
53(2) and 
142(4),
rules 
13(6),
80(1A) and 
130(per
month)
(ii) On 
request 
for 
extension 
of time or 
condonatio 
n of delay 
(per
month) 
under sub­
rule (4)
of rule 12 
or sub­
rule (2) 
or rule 
131.
2000
10000
2200
11000
(iii) On 
request 
for 
extension 
of time 
under sub­
rule (5) 
of rule 
24B(per 
month)
1000
4000
1100
4400
(iv) On 
request 
for 
extension 
of time 
under sub­
rule (11) 
of rule 
24C(per 
month)
2000
10000
2200
11000
(v) On 
request 
for 
extension
100000
50000
11000
55000
79

--- PAGE 80 ---
of time 
under rule 
138 (per 
month).
5.
On filing 
a 
declaratio 
n as to 
inventorsh 
ip under 
sub-rule 
(6) of 
rule 13
5
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
6.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
postdating
-
800
4000
880
4400
7.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
deletion 
of 
reference 
under 
section 
19(2)
-
800
4000
880
4400
8.
(i) On 
claim 
under 
section 
20(1)
6
800
4000
880
4400
(ii) On 
request 
for 
direction 
under 
section 
20(4) or 
20(5)
6
800
4000
880
4400
9.
(i) On 
notice of 
opposition 
to grant 
of patent 
under 
section 
25(2)
7
8000
40000
not 
allowed
not 
allowed
(ii) On 
filing 
representa 
tion 
opposing 
grant of
7A
4000
20000
not 
allowed
not 
allowed
80

--- PAGE 81 ---
patent 
under 
section 
25(1)
10.
On giving 
notice 
that 
hearing 
before 
Controller 
shall be 
attended 
under rule 
62(2).
-
1500
7500
1700
8300
11
On 
applicatio 
n sections 
28(2)
8
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
On 
applicatio 
n sections 
28(3) or 
28(7).
800
4000
880
4400
12.
Certificat 
e of 
inventorsh 
ip under 
rule 70A.
8A
900
Not 
applicabl 
e
1000
Not 
applicabl 
e
13.
Request 
for 
publicatio 
n under 
section 
11A(2) and 
rule 24A
9
2500
12500
2750
13750
14.
On 
applicatio 
n under 
section 44 
for 
amendment 
of patent.
10
2400
12000
2650
13200
15.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
directions 
under 
section 
51(1) or 
51(2).
11
2400
12000
2650
13200
16.
On request 
for grant 
of a 
patent
12
2400
12000
2650
13200
81

--- PAGE 82 ---
under 
section
26(1) and
52(2).
17.
On request 
for 
converting 
a patent 
of 
addiction 
to an 
independen 
t patent 
under 
section 
55(1)
2400
12000
2650
13200
18.
For 
renewal of 
a patent 
under 
section 53
(i)
before the 
expiration 
of the 2nd 
year from 
the date 
of patent 
in respect 
of 3rd 
year;
-
800
4000
880
4400
(ii)
before the 
expiration 
of the 3rd 
year in 
respect of 
the 4th 
year;
-
800
4000
880
4400
(iii 
)
before the 
expiration 
of the 4th 
year in 
respect of 
the 5th 
year;
-
800
4000
880
4400
(iv)
before the 
expiration 
of the 5th 
year in 
respect of 
the 6th 
year;
-
800
4000
880
4400
(v)
before the 
expiration 
of the 6th 
year in
-
2400
12000
2650
13200
82

--- PAGE 83 ---
respect of 
the 7th 
year;
(vi)
before the 
expiration 
of the 7th 
year in 
respect of 
the 8th 
year;
-
2400
12000
2650
13200
(vii 
)
before the 
expiration 
of the 8th 
year in 
respect of 
the 9th 
year;
-
2400
12000
2650
13200
(vii 
i)
before the 
expiration 
of the 9th 
year in 
respect of 
the 10th 
year;
-
2400
12000
2650
13200
(ix)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
10th year 
in respect 
of the 
11th year;
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
(x)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
11th year 
in respect 
of the 
12th year;
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
(xi)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
12th year 
in respect 
of the 
13th year;
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
(xii 
)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
13th year 
in respect 
of the 
14th year;
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
(xii 
i)
before the 
expiration 
of the
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
83

--- PAGE 84 ---
14th year 
in respect 
of the
15th year;
(xiv 
)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
15th year 
in respect 
of the 
16th year;
-
8000
40000
8800
44000
(xv)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
16th year 
in respect 
of the 
17th year;
-
8000
40000
8800
44000
(xvi 
)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
17th year 
in respect 
of the 
18th year;
-
8000
40000
8800
44000
(xvi 
i)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
18th year 
in respect 
of the 
19th year;
8000
40000
8800
44000
(xvi 
ii)
before the 
expiration 
of the 
19th year 
in respect 
of the 
20th year;
8000
40000
8800
44000
19.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
amendment 
of 
applicatio 
n for 
patent or 
complete 
specificat 
ion or 
other 
related 
documents 
under 
section 57
13
84

--- PAGE 85 ---
(i)
before 
grant of 
patent;
800
4000
880
4400
(ii)
after 
grant of 
patent
1600
8000
1750
8800
(iii 
)
where 
amendment 
is for 
changing 
name or 
address or 
nationalit 
y or 
address 
for 
service.
320
1600
350
1750
.
On notice 
of 
opposition 
to an 
applicatio 
n under 
section 
57(4), 
61(1) and 
87(2) or 
to 
surrender 
a patent 
under 
section 
63(3) or 
to a 
request 
under 
section 
78(5).
14
2400
12000
2650
13200
21.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
restoratio 
n of a 
patent 
under 
section 
60.
15
2400
12000
2650
13200
22.
Additional 
fee for 
restoratio 
n under 
section 
61(3) and 
rule 86(1)
-
4800
24000
5300
26400
23.
On notice
-
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
85

--- PAGE 86 ---
of offer
to 
surrender 
a patent
under 
section 
63.
.
On 
applicatio 
n for the 
entry in 
the 
register 
of patents 
of the 
name of a 
person 
entitled 
to a 
patent or 
as a share 
or as a 
mortgage 
or as 
licensee 
or as 
otherwise 
or for the 
entry in 
the 
register 
of patents 
of 
notificati 
on of a 
document 
under 
sections 
69(1) or 
69(2) and 
rules 
90(1) or 
90(2).
16
1600
(In 
respect 
of each 
patent)
8000
(In 
respect 
of each 
patent)
1750
(In 
respect 
of each 
patent)
8800
(In 
respect 
of each 
patent)
25.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
alternatio 
n of an 
entry in 
the 
register 
of patents 
or 
register 
of patent 
agent
-
320
1600
350
1750
86

--- PAGE 87 ---
under
rules
94(1) or
rule 
118(1).
26.
On request 
for entry 
of an 
additional 
address 
for 
service in 
the 
Register 
of Patents 
under 
rules 
94(3)
-
800
4000
880
4400
27.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
compulsory 
license 
under 
section 
84(1), 
91(1), 
92(1) and 
92A.
17
2400
12000
2650
13200
28
On request 
for 
examinatio 
n of 
applicatio 
n for 
patent
18
(i) under 
section
11B and 
rule 24(1)
4000
20000
4400
22000
(ii) under 
rule
20(4)(ii)
5600
28000
6150
30800
29
On request 
for 
expedited 
examinatio 
n of 
applicatio 
n for 
patent 
under rule 
24C
18A
8000
60000
Not 
Allowed
Not 
Allowed
87

--- PAGE 88 ---
30.
Conversion 
of the 
request 
for 
examinatio 
n filed 
under rule 
24B to 
request 
for 
expedited 
examinatio 
n under 
rule 24C
18A
4000
40000
Not 
Allowed
Not 
Allowed
31.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
revocation 
of a 
patent 
under 
section 
85(1)
19
2400
12000
2650
13200
32.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
revision 
of terms 
and 
conditions 
of license 
under 
section 
88(4)
20
2400
12000
2650
13200
33.
On request 
for 
terminatio 
n of 
compulsory 
licence 
under 
section 
94.
21
2400
12000
2650
13200
34.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
registrati 
on as a 
patent 
agent 
under rule 
109(1) or 
112.
22
3200
Not 
applicabl 
e
3500
Not 
applicabl 
e
35.
On request 
for
-
1600
Not 
applicabl
1750
Not 
applicabl
88

--- PAGE 89 ---
appearing 
in the 
qualifying 
examinatio 
n under 
rule
109(3)
e
e
.
For 
continuanc 
e of name 
of a 
person in 
the 
register 
of patent 
agent
-
Not 
applicabl 
e
Not 
applicabl 
e
(i) for 
the 1st 
year to be 
paid along 
with
registrati 
on;
-
800
880
(ii) for 
every year 
excluding 
the 1st of 
April in 
each year.
800
880
37.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
duplicate 
certificat 
e of 
patent 
agent 
under rule 
111A
-
1600
Not 
applicabl 
e
1750
Not 
applicabl 
e
38.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
restoratio 
n of the 
name of a 
person in 
the 
register 
of patent 
agents 
under rule 
117(1)
23
1600
(Plus 
continuat 
ion fee 
under 
entry 
number
36)
Not 
applicabl 
e
1750
(Plus 
continuat 
ion fee 
under 
entry 
number
36)
Not 
applicabl 
e
39.
On a
-
800
4000
880
4400
89

--- PAGE 90 ---
request 
for 
correction
of 
clerical
error 
under 
section 
78(2).
40.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
review or 
setting 
aside the 
decisions 
or order 
of the 
controller 
under 
section 
77(1)(f) 
or 
77(1)(g).
24
1600
8000
1750
8800
41.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
permission 
for 
applying 
patent 
outside 
India 
under 
section 39 
and rule 
71(1).
25
1600
8000
1750
8800
42.
On 
applicatio 
n for 
duplicate 
patent 
under 
section 
154 and 
rule 132.
-
1600
8000
1750
8800
43.
(i) On 
request 
for 
certified 
copies 
under 
section 72 
or for 
certificat
-
1000
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
5000
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
1100
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
5500
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
90

--- PAGE 91 ---
e under 
section 
147 and 
rule 
133(1)
(ii) On 
request 
for 
certified 
copies 
under 
section 72 
or for 
certificat 
e under 
section 
147 and 
rule
133(2)
2400
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
12000
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
3300
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
13200
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
44.
For 
certifying 
office 
copies, 
printed 
each.
-
800
4000
880
4400
45.
On request 
for 
inspection 
of 
register 
under 
section 
72, 
inspection 
under rule 
27 or rule 
74A.
-
320
1600
350
1750
46.
On request 
for 
informatio 
n under 
section 
153 and 
rule 134.
-
480
2400
530
2650
47.
On form of 
authorizat 
ion of 
patent 
agent.
26
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
48.
On 
petition 
not 
otherwise 
provided
-
1600
8000
1750
8800
91

--- PAGE 92 ---
for.
49.
For 
supplying 
of 
photocopie 
s of the 
documents 
per page.
-
10
10
10
10
50.
Transmitta 
l fee for 
Internatio 
nal 
applicatio 
n.
-
3200
16000
3500
17600
51.
Transmitta 
l fee for 
Internatio 
nal 
applicatio 
n.(for 
ePCT 
filing)
-
No fee
No fee
Not 
applicabl 
e
Not 
applicabl 
e
.
For 
preparatio 
n of 
certified 
copy of 
priority 
document 
and for 
transmissi 
on of the 
same to 
the
Internatio 
nal Bureau 
of World 
Intellectu 
al
Property 
Organisati 
on.
-
1000
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
5000
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
1100
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
5500
(up to 30 
pages
and, 
thereafte 
r 30 for 
each 
extra 
page)
53.
For 
preparatio 
n of 
certified 
copy of 
priority 
document 
and e‐ 
transmissi 
on through 
WIPO DAS.
-
No fee
No fee
Not 
applicabl 
e
Not 
applicabl 
e
54.
On 
statement
27
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
92

--- PAGE 93 ---
regarding 
working of 
a patented 
invention
on a
commercial 
scale in
India
under 
section
146(2) and 
rule
131(1).
55.
To be 
submitted 
for 
claiming 
the status 
of a small 
entity or 
startup
28
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
56.
Applicatio 
n for 
withdrawin 
g the 
applicatio 
n under 
section 
11B(4), 
and rule 
7(4A), and 
26
29
No fee
No fee
No fee
No fee
57.
Request 
for 
adjournmen 
t of 
hearing 
under rule 
129A(for 
each 
adjournmen 
t)
-
1000
5000
1100
5500
58.
Miscellane 
ous form 
under rule 
8(2) to be 
used when 
no other 
form is 
prescribed
30
AS applicable
59.
Grace 
period.
31
500
2500
550
2750
93

--- PAGE 94 ---
THE SECOND SCHEDULE Forms [Omitted] 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE Forms [Omitted]
94

--- PAGE 95 ---
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE SCALE OF COSTS (See Rule 136(1))
Number 
of 
entry
Matter in respect of 
which cost to be 
awarded
Amount in fees ( in rupees)
Natural person(s) 
or Startup(s) or 
Small entit(yies) 
or educational 
institution(s)
Other(s), alone 
or with natural 
person(s) or 
Startup(s) or 
Small 
entit(yies) or 
educational 
institution(s)
1
For notice of 
opposition under 
sections 25, 57, 60,
63, 78, 87(2) or
88(4).
2400
12000
2
For application for 
compulsory licence 
under sections 84(l), 
91(1) or 92(1).
1500
6000
3
For application for 
revision of terms 
and conditions of 
licence under 
section 88(4) .
2400
12000
4
For notice of 
intention to attend 
the hearing under 
rule 62(2).
1500
6000
5
Stamp fee for power 
of attorney where a 
patent agent or
other person has
been appointed or 
stamp fee in respect
of relevant 
affidavits.
The amount 
actually paid.
The amount 
actually paid.
6
For statement under 
rule 57 or reply 
statement under rule 
58 or for each 
affidavit, if 
relevant.
4000
5000
7
For each document of 
publication produced 
in the proceedings, 
if relevant
1600
2000
8
For each unnecessary 
or irrelevant 
affidavit or 
citation.
1600
2000
9
For every day or 
part day of hearing 
before the 
Controller.
4000
5000
95

--- PAGE 96 ---
10
Sub-rule (2) of rule 
136
Aggregate of 
amounts
actually paid 
in respect of 
entries 1, 2,
12, 27, 28, 29 of 
the First
Schedule, as may 
be applicable.
Twice the 
aggregate of 
amounts actually 
paid in respect 
of entries 1, 2,
12, 27, 28, 29 of
the First 
Schedule, as may 
be applicable.
96

--- PAGE 97 ---
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
SI.
No
On what payable 
(Relevant 
provision of 
Patents Rules, 
2003, if any)
Relevant 
Rule of 
regulations 
under the
Treaty
Natural 
person(s) or 
Startup(s) or 
Small 
entit(yies) or 
educational 
institution(s)
Other(s), 
alone or with 
natural 
person(s) or 
Startup(s) or 
Small 
entit(yies) or 
educational 
institution(s)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(In Rupees)
(In Rupees)
1.
Search fee
Rule 
16.1(a)
2500
10000
2.
Additional fee 
under rule 19B 
(5)
Rule 40.2
2500
10000
3.
Protest fee under 
rules 19B(5) and 
19J(5)
Rules
40.2(e) and
68.3(e)
1000
4000
4.
Preliminary 
examination fee
Rule 58.1
3000
12000
5.
Additional fee 
under rule 19J(5)
u.
3000
12000
6.
Preliminary 
examination fee 
if the 
International
Search Report was 
prepared by the 
Indian
International 
Searching 
Authority
2500
10000
7.
Additional fee 
under the rule 
19J(5), if the 
International 
Search Report 
was prepared by 
the Indian 
International 
Searching 
Authority
2500
10000
8.
Handling fee to 
be paid to be 1B
Rule 57
AS specified in the schedule 
of fee annexed to the 
regulations made under the 
Treaty
9.
Late furnishing 
fee
Rule 
13ter.1(c), 
13ter.2, 
12.3(e), 
12.4(e)
1000
4000
97

--- PAGE 98 ---
10.
Late payment fee
Rule 
58bis.2, 
16bis.2
In accordance with the 
regulations made under the 
Treaty
11.
Copy of Results 
of Earlier Search 
and of Earlier 
Application
12bis.1(c)
1000
4000
98
